welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday
life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a
professor of neurobiology and
Opthalmology at Stanford School of
Medicine my guest today is Dr Jordan
Peterson Dr Jordan Peterson is a
psychologist an author and one of the
most influential public intellectuals of
our time today we discuss the human
animal what it means to be a human being
at the level of psychology ology at the
level of Neuroscience and indeed at the
level of expression of different
personality types within us most of us
don't think about having different
personalities however as we discuss
today due to the activity of specific
brain circuitries including the
hypothalamus the prefrontal cortex and
others we each and all can adopt
different states of mind that powerfully
influence our emotions our thoughts and
our actions and in so doing we are
different people depending on those
states of mind today's discussion is
both an intellectual one and a practical
one you will learn where and how to
place your thoughts you will learn the
relationship between the Call to
Adventure and responsibility and as Dr
Peterson emphasizes in his new book we
who wrestle with God he emphasizes the
use of story in this case biblical
stories to understand oneself and to
best guide one's actions towards the
most positive and generative outcomes we
discuss the self romantic relationships
and commitments
the family community and culture we also
discuss the media politics cancel
culture things like social media and
pornography shifting masculine and
feminine roles and the innate human
drive to create action at a distance
both in space and in time today's
discussion is both intellectual and
practical Dr Peterson emphasizes how to
use different sources of story
philosophy Psychology and Neuroscience
to understand and best guide one's
decision making process indeed he
discusses the tight relationship between
the Call to Adventure and responsibility
as a trustable framework from moving
forward in life towards One's best
possible outcomes and I'm certain that
by the end of today's discussion you
will be thinking about your own neural
circuits that is the connections in your
brain that drive emotions thoughts and
behavior as well as your psychology your
different states of mind and you are
going to have a number of different
tools and Frameworks with which to apply
all that knowledge toward the best
possible outcomes before we begin I'd
like to emphasize that this podcast is
separate from my teaching and research
roles at Stanford it is however part of
my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to Consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is David David
makes a protein bar unlike any other it
has 28 grams of protein only 150
calories and zero grams of sugar that's
right 28 gram of protein and 75% of its
calories come from protein These Bars
from David also taste amazing my
favorite flavor is chocolate chip cookie
dough but then again I also like the
chocolate fudge flavored one and I also
like the cake flavored one basically I
like all the flavors they're incredibly
delicious for me personally I strive to
eat mostly Whole Foods however when I'm
in a rush or I'm away from home or I'm
just looking for a quick afternoon snack
I often find that I'm looking for a high
quality protein source with David I'm
able to get 28 gam of protein with the
calories of a snack which makes it very
easy to hit my protein goals of 1 gram
of protein per pound of body weight each
day and it allows me to do that without
taking in excess calories I typically
eat a David bar in the early afternoon
or even midafternoon if I want to bridge
that gap between lunch and dinner I like
that it's a little bit sweet so it
tastes like a tasty snack but it's also
giving me that 28 grams of very high
quality protein with just 150 calories
if you would like to try David you can
go to
david.com huberman again the link is
davidpro
docomo today's episode is also brought
To Us by levels levels is a program that
lets you see how different foods affect
your health by giving you real-time
feedback on your diet using a continuous
glucose monitor one of the most
important factors in both your short and
long-term health is your body's ability
to manage blood glucose or blood sugar
to maintain energy and focus throughout
the day you want to keep your blood
glucose steady without big spikes or
crashes I first started using levels
about 3 years ago as a way to understand
how different foods impacted my blood
glucose levels and it's proven
incredibly informative for determining
my food choices when I eat specific
foods and how I time eating relative to
things like my workouts both weight
training and cardiovascular training
things like running and when to eat
before I go to sleep to allow for the
most stable blood sugar throughout the
night indeed using levels has helped
shape my entire schedule so if you're
interested in learning more about levels
and trying a CGM yourself you can go to
levels. link huberman levels has just
launched a new CGM sensor that is
smaller and has even better tracking
than before right now they're also
offering an additional two free months
of membership again that's levels. link
spelled l i n k/ huberman to try the new
sensor and two free months of membership
and now for my discussion with Dr Jordan
Peterson Dr Jordan Peterson welcome
thank you sir delighted to have you here
and want to talk about elements within
your new book yeah also some elements
within your previous books and within
that mind of yours
generally as a framework for that I'm
wondering if you would tolerate or
permit a little bit of a discussion
about sort of brain and psychology um
just kind of lay the groundwork for
where we might um prod some of the
themes that you bring up related to the
book so I view the brain as obviously a
bunch of cells and parts Etc but I
distill it down to some basic features
first of all we have an autonomic
physiology I think we'd both agree on
that that regulates our sleepiness and
wakefulness our breathing our heart rate
stuff that runs in the
background and then we have a lot of
circuitry devoted to what I would call
impulses things that we desire we want
to move toward repetitive behaviors and
we also have some impulses to avoid
things that are putrid painful Etc
that's all in there like it is in other
we should talk about the idea of impulse
in relationship to that characterization
okay yeah because there's an important
there's an important point to be made on
the there you pay a price for
characterizing that as impulse and and
I'd like to explore that with you
because it's crucial great we'll Circle
back to impulse I'd like to do that and
then we have a lot of circuitry people
will hear about it as executive function
prefrontal circuitry which does many
things but I like to think of um as a
circuit that can say and here I'm
borrowing from a previous guest who's a
neuro surgeon it can say sh or exert
what's called top- down suppression on
these what I'm calling impulses it can
we should talk about that too the
suppression idea and the inhibition idea
in general great because there's I think
there's a parallel problem there to the
notion of impulse that's very much worth
delving into great yeah so circuitry
that's devoted to our ability to self-
inhibit the desire to reach for
something or to avoid something we can
push ourselves into things that would
otherwise be aversive we can avoid doing
things that would otherwise drive us to
quote unquote just do it
anyway and then we have what I think of
as our default settings kind of how
we're operating in the world with
respect to food other people ourselves
our
thoughts if we don't
intervene with ourselves and these
default settings are of course
established by both nature a genetic
program that wires up circuitry but also
Nur
because of the immense neuroplasticity
that occurs in the first 25 years plus
of life but especially those first years
of life and then of course we have
neuroplasticity this incredible gift
that humans have more of than any other
species as far as we know which is we
can decide to make changes now the
reason I lay out this framework as
opposed to starting with a question is
because there are so many amazing
questions that you ask in this book you
know we who wrestle with God I mean
trying to wrap our arms in Minds around
this huge set of questions and it
occurred to me just step back from all
of that and ask is part of the reason
that we have a concept of God that there
are multiple
religions is that the consequence of
Some Humans at some point realizing or
perhaps God himself
realizing that what we are equipped with
as humans which we just described is
insufficient to allow us to to evolve as
a species and be the best version of
ourselves I think this for me really is
like the central question of at least my
life which is to what extent do I need
to intervene with my default settings
rewire them engage that prefrontal
cortex and you know push down on some
repetitive or aversive
behaviors and to what extent can we do
that maybe and to what end and to what
end and maybe we need a rule book uh you
know I I am starting to believe and I'm
now 49 years old
that we need a rule book that the neural
circuitry that's encased within our
skulls is not sufficient to allow us to
navigate through life our best we kind
of know that we need a rule book even
you you admitted that in some ways
implicitly when you discussed the fact
that we have a 25 years socialization
window and what that means is that we
have to interact with other people and
our traditions in order to set us right
and that's so complex it takes 25 years
and so we're learning something from
that and that's indication that our
let's say default biological settings
are insufficient to guide us into the
future right and so then the question is
well what is it that you're learning as
a consequence of that socialization
process and you can think about it and
people have thought about it as a a
series of complex inhibitions of lower
order motivational States impulses but
I'm not very happy with the inhibition
model because inhibition is
unsophisticated
socialization integration is
sophisticated socialization so here
here's a way of I really learned this I
think from contrasting Freud with P
because Freud's model super ego is
really an inhibition model and Freud was
neurologist P's model was very different
he thought of the properly socialized
person as someone who had integrated
their lower order we'll call them
impulses for now into a sustainable
voluntary structure that regulated them
and gave them all their proper place
that's very different than an inhibitory
model so for example I'll give you an
example from my own life my son was
quite an um
willful young child wonder where he got
it from yeah well fair enough and and my
father was you know a formidable
character and so my son liked to do what
he liked to do and it took him it took
quite a bit of tussling with him to help
him I wouldn't say inhibit that or
regulate to integrate it and one of the
consequences of that was he became a
very good athlete and so why is that
relevant well because it wasn't like he
stopped being assertive or even
aggressive it's that he learned how to
put that aggression in its proper place
in relationship to a goal that was much
more sophisticated than merely getting
his own way moment to moment okay so
integration is a better like a a very
sophisticated athlete a team athlete in
particular isn't not aggressive and
they're not inhibiting their aggression
on the playing field they may now and
then when they're provoked let's say but
all things considered what they've done
is subordinate their aggression to a
higher order goal that enables them to
be more successful but also to be
successful in a maximally social and
sustainable way and PJ's point and he's
absolutely right about this is that
that's much better conceptualized as
integration and then with regard to
impulse because I said I would return to
that I I spent a lot of time walking
through the behavioral literature right
and a lot of that was derived from
animal experiments and it was predicated
on the idea that if you could explain
something on the basis of a
deterministic reflex you should and
there's some there's something to be
said for that hypothesis don't make your
theory any more complex than it needs to
be how far can you get with with a
theory of chain reflexes a deterministic
theory the behavior has gone a long way
they couldn't get to the highest strata
of human endeavor with a chained reflex
Theory but there was a lot of things
they did that were very good but one of
the things they made a big mistake about
was to conceptualize motivational States
let's say as impulses or
drives that's not sufficient because it
fails to take into account the effect of
those States on
perception so it's much better to think
of a motivated State this is what helped
me integrate behavioral Theory with
psychoanalytic theory especially the the
psychoanalytic theory of religious
Endeavor it's much better to think of
those lower order motivational States as
personalities their
subpersonalities they have their
perceptions they have their objects of
perception they have their uh cognitive
rationalizations you certainly see that
in addiction let's say they have their
emotions like they are small
personalities unidimensional very
narrow-minded personalities but they're
personalities they're not impulses so
are they personalities within our what
most people would think of as our larger
personality I mean what I'm hearing is
that let's say somebody's an addict it
depends on how integrated you are
because you could be nothing but a
succession of dominion of
subpersonalities that's what a
2-year-old
is right and so you have to build an
integrating personality on top of those
subpersonalities but not in a manner
that inhibits them that means your
socialization is in unsophisticated even
Freud knew this because even though he
had basically an inhibitory model of say
super ego regulation um he believed that
a healthy personality would have the
impulse of aggression and the impulse of
sexuality to take two major lower order
motivational States into account would
have them integrated into the
functioning ego the the issue is
integration and so what you're doing
when you're social like okay when when
my son for example would become willful
in a manner that I regarded as
counterproductive for him and the
household and and the rule would be you
can't act that way because if you act
that
way people aren't going to approve of
you and that's a bad plan so you have to
you have to control that because it's
not going to work out well for you if
you don't okay so I use timeout now
timeout is an effective disciplinary
strategy for social creatures because we
don't like isolation and so timeout
basically takes child puts the child in
isolation that produces a pain like
response because social isolation
produces pure inhibition right well well
that's the question you see that's the
question he had to inhibit his immediate
desire say to run around because he was
going to sit on the steps but see the I
put a rule in place there and the rule
was as soon as you get yourself under
control you can leave the stairs okay so
now the question is what does under
control mean one interpretation is
inhibition another interpretation is no
no he's developing a superordinate
personality probably cortically that has
enough Dominion so that those underlying
motivational states can now be
integrated and placed properly into a
hierarchy and when I'm insisting that he
regulate his behavior and I allow him to
move off the step when he is now able to
be a social creature again instead of
falling prey to his whim I'm reinforcing
the cortical integration of those
underlying motivational States now you
might think the human organism is comes
into the world with with a a Waring
battleground of primordial motivational
States that's per perfectly reasonable
view we know a lot of that is mediated
by the hypothalamus for example the AMD
and these lower order
biologically what pre-programmed to some
degree pre-programmed systems now the
specific manner in which those systems
should find their expression and the
specific way that they're going to be
hierarchically integrated is going to
depend to a tremendous degree on the
particulars of the society at that
moment which is why you need that
18-year framework to to hone the manner
in which those systems make themselves
manifest but the I think the best way to
conceptualize that is that it's it's the
hierarchical integration of the
motivational States within an
overarching superordinate personality
and that personality is not bound to the
moment it takes the medium and long-term
into account and it's not self-serving
like a 2-year-old would be because you
have to take other people into account
if you're going to be successful so you
and this is where the cortex comes in as
far as I'm concerned this is what it's
doing it's
stretching the it's integrating the
lower order temporally Bound
motivational states that are
specifically self-serving to a much
broader vision of the world that takes
the future into account and other people
and and that's that's hard it's very
hard I I love this and I'll tell you why
um because the way that I think of the
prefrontal cortex is that its main job
is context dependent strategy setting
right context dependent context
dependent that's a crucial issue and you
mentioned hypothalamus this you know
it's basically the size of you know two
uh marbles or so sitting above the roof
of our mouth tiny tiny little brain area
it's mostly switches in there what do I
mean by that anytime a neurosurgeon is
stimulated neurons in a little sub area
of the hypothalamus you get either Rage
or sexual appetite or mating with
inanimate objects I mean this was done
in both non-human primates and in hum
uncontrollable thirst uncontrollable
thirst hunger total ression of hunger I
mean all the basic drives are operating
in they like swies and prefrontal cortex
has direct access to it to the hypo
hypothalamus and prefrontal cortex is
context dependent learning context
dependent decision- making and I love
that you brought in this notion
of changing an Impulse in the example
that you gave in your son's impulse to
be aggressive or wild in some way that
was inappropriate for the home
environment at that moment and two
things that you said uh really resonate
the prefrontal cortex his prefrontal
cortex had to learn that whatever he was
feeling for himself his own desires
needed to be placed in the context of
other people's wishes desires and needs
as well so there's an even for him to
thrive right it's not merely a sacrifice
of his own desire for the sake of others
it's like no no look kid if you're we
know this if you're if you have the same
orientation towards other people at four
that you did with you were twoo
especially if you're tilted a little in
the aggressive Direction you will not
make friends and you will be isolated
and alienated for the rest of your life
so that 2-year-old impulsiveness that
has its place two it starts to modify
radically at three and it better be
fixed by four and the reason for that is
that you have to integrate yourself into
the social World which means in the case
of children it means well you want to
have friends and so the reason you're
you're you're disciplining your child
isn't to teach them that what they're
doing is bad you know in that
simple in in that simple sense that you
might interpret punishment it's like no
you need to be more sophisticated well
why well you have to be able to take
turns well why well because you no one
like you otherwise well what's the
problem with that well first of all
we're hyp social like you can punish
Psychopaths by putting them in isolation
that's how social human beings are you
take the most antisocial human beings
there are and you can punish them by
making them be alone right so that's how
social we are so you want to you you're
you're modeling for your child a
strategy of of even satisfaction for his
own basic drives that takes context in
the most sophisticated possible way into
account right and that is see as soon as
you understand that that's the fostering
of like a meta personality in the child
which would really be the personality of
that child the integrated personality
you start to understand how that might
be related to religious thinking because
religious thinking is the attempt to
formulate something approximating an
ideal personality right now that's
attributed there that's often attributed
elements of the Divine but there's
reasons for that that we could go into
but as soon as you know that the basic
structure even at the lower motivational
level is personality well then that that
changes the way you view the brain look
a lot of archaic deities are
motivational systems could you give me
an example the God of War Mars that's
rage that was a God that the Vikings
invoked before they went into battle
they would use Ammon muscaria and they
imitated Predators right from an early
age this is a aceto Coline by the way
folks has two general receptor systems
the nicotinic system which is a
stimulant but also relaxes you that's
that's why people like nicotine um and
then the muscarinic system which um
creates uh uh changes in our
self-perception and perception of the
things around us um it's not so much a
stimulant as it um it's a I would Veer
towards almost like a psychedelic or an
it has a a um an effect of making us
less fearful and um and intrigued it's a
radically atypical psychedelic yeah it's
hard to describe hard to describe it's
outside the the LSD cybin masculine
domain so people would take this this as
an agent the Vikings would take this as
an agent going into sure because what
they were trying to do is make the
personality of Rage
superordinate with no pain right and
they practiced that from a very early
age so the Vikings worked themselves up
they went berser that means to wear the
be shirt right they transformed
themselves so to speak into Predators
they would narrow the context within
which their um I'm calling them impulses
but you're giving a more sophisticated
explanation for them within which their
the aggressive impulse the strategically
aggressive impulse could be channeled
right full rain give full rain right
they were experts at that to be able to
decapitate people eviscerate people do
whatever it was that they needed to do
in order to win and and to suppress
their own feelings of pain yeah well
then you could imagine in a way that
what they were doing was bringing the
full resources of the cortex to and
placing them at the service of the rage
circuits in the hypothalamus like we
have no idea what that would be like no
there aren't we don't do that we have no
idea what a human being who does that is
like if they're expert at it you uh you
it would give you nightmares to think
about it deeply there there's an
experiment if I may um that might shed
some light on what it would look like uh
um a former guest on this podcast
actually um David Anderson at Caltech
has been studying hypothalamic circuits
and he and his former postto da Lynn
discovered a small tiny tiny collection
of neurons in the ventromedial hyp
Thalamus that when stimulated would send
these animals these mice you can find
videos of this online into a rage now
the interesting thing is is it required
the presence of another mouse right
right and right so it's still somewhat
context depend somewhat context
dependent if they were alone in their
cage they wouldn't attack themselves or
the walls of the cage but if you put a
air or water-filled glove within the
cage they would absolutely attack it to
try and destroy it then you turn off
these neurons the the mouse is Cal we
can put link to this in the show note
caption now here's what's remarkable the
ventromedial hypothalamus has these
neurons basically interspersed with
other neurons that when
stimulated suppress rage and activate
copulation incredible right within the
same structure you have these mutually
exclusive sets of of neurons and
behaviors and it and it speaks to I
think some of the things that uh Freud
and and others have talk about in terms
of the the juxtaposition of of these
neurons but um that they they mutually
inhibit one another which lends itself
to some really interesting questions
about um when those two when uh
aggression and sexuality become become
combined in in states of pathology okay
so but in any event um it so context
dependent control over impulses over the
hypothalamus seems to be the theme here
and the other thing that that you
mentioned is the ability for your son in
this case but presumably also the
Vikings to be able to broaden their
temporal scope to be able to think about
the time domain differently this is
something I'm absolutely obsessed by the
more we experience what I brought up at
the beginning was that we have this
autonomic arousal system the more alert
we are the less we are able to take
ourselves into um Notions of this two
shall pass the past the present and the
future it tends autonomic activation
stress Panic fear anger tend to make us
lose sight we we get blinders on lose
sight of the fact that there was a past
there's a present and there's a future
well that's because they're collapsing
they're collapsing your domain of of
apprehension to the moment so you will
act you have to collapse to the moment
to act right and so we should also point
out for everyone that the other you
don't want to underestimate the
sophistication of the hypothalamus and
this is partly why conceptualizing its
various States as subpersonalities is so
useful I mean it's it's not
unsophisticated you can take a female
cat and take out its whole brain except
for the hypothalamus so it's like 990 5%
of its brain is gone and in a relatively
controlled environment it's
indistinguishable from a normal cat it
can in it can do cat things and live now
it it's h and it's hyper exploratory now
that's a that's a very strange thing
where is a cat with no brain is hyp
exploratory it's not what you'd think at
all but it it shows you how
sophisticated the hypothalamus is it can
run these programs but they're programs
of Personality because they have
perceptions it can run them and it and
it it's and it can do that quite
successfully now all the higher order
subcortical and cortical systems are
well I think they are to your point
their ways of expanding the apprehension
of those fundamental motivational
systems across broader and broader spans
of time incorporating more and more
people but also solving the problem of
the conflict that emerges between those
fundamental motivational States right
it's like well what do you do when
you're hungry and tired
right well you have to mediate between
the states to some degree what do you do
if you want to solve the problem of
being hungry and tired of over a long
period of time with other people right
well you need more and more brain to
calculate that right and so a huge part
of what maturation is is when we think
about it as the capacity to forego
gratification actually what's happening
is that as you mature and your cortex
comes online let's say you're able to
regulate your behavior with more more
and more other things taken into account
right right and you know that there has
to be some War there which is why you're
wrestling with god let's say there has
to be some War there because it's also
the case that you do have to satiate
yourself in relationship to your basic
biological needs or you die and so
there's going to be tension that is
something like the tension between the
individual and the group you might say
that's how the Russians or the freudians
would think about it so the weird thing
about that is that
it's not useful to to identify your
individuality with the Dominion of a
whim and that's what hedonists do and
that's what immature people do they
think well why shouldn't I get what I
want it's like I see so your claim is
that the you that superordinate is what
you want that isn't that means you're
subjugated to these low order
personalities and you might say well why
why is that wrong it's like well you're
a 2-year-old it doesn't work you know if
if it's all about you and your immediate
gratification well first of all you're
rather Psychopathic because you could
think of psychopathy as the extension of
immaturity into adulthood that's a
pretty good default way of
conceptualizing it it's like it's an
unsophisticated strategy they want what
they want now regardless and they don't
care about the the we or the future fure
see see one this is one of the ways I
caught a to this relationship was I what
because I studied antisocial behavior
for a very long
time psychopaths in particular are
notorious for their inability to learn
from experience okay so what does that
mean it means that if they do something
impulsive that causes them trouble in
the future the fact of that future
trouble has no bearing on their
continued Behavior well what that means
is that they are so non
communitarian that they're willing to
even betray their own future selves
there's no difference between that
betraying someone else it's exactly the
same mechanism very much a toddler
toddler well so here's something I
learned in Montreal I worked with a man
named rishard Tromblay there and rishard
I think Richard's lab used up one-third
of all social science funding for Quebec
at one time he was radically successful
researcher and he was really interested
in antisocial behavior and and was
trying to get to the roots and one of
the conclusions that our lab
Enterprise mve towards was that one
observation was that if you take
two-year-olds if you take kids at
different ages you could imagine you
made a group of two-year olds threey
olds group of foury olds all the way up
to 15 you just let them interact the
two-year-olds are the most
aggressive and but if you analyze the
two-year-olds themselves you find that
all the aggressive kids are boys and
it's only a fraction of them about 5% so
if you group two year olds together 5%
of the boys will kick steal hit and bite
which was our definition of early onet
antisocial
Behavior almost all of those kids are
socialized by the age of four right the
remnant that aren't get alienated
because they have no friends and they're
the ones who become juvenile delinquents
and then early onset criminals and then
repeat of offenders right and so what it
is is imagine there's some kids whose
default their rage circuits are a little
bit more dominant than the typical kid
they're often bigger physically yeah
especially the bite the biting I uh
forgive me for interrupting but there's
a very interesting paper published about
two years ago showing that there's a
specific circuit from the hypothalamus
to the neurons that control uh jaw
closure that are independent of the
neurons that control jaw jaw closure for
eating and for drinking that are
specifically for aggressive biting I
mean I hope people understand the
significance of this because what this
means is there are dedicated circuits
for aggressive biting in your
hypothalamus we all learn to suppress
these except probably under conditions
where our life is endangered in which
case you'd probably bite like hell in
order to try and get out of that
circumstance but we are all born with
this circuit we die with this circuit
most of us apparently not these kids
learn to suppress the circuit right
right or integr an 8-year-old B
is a scary thing a one-year-old biter is
like a a little bit of a worrisome thing
a 2-year-old like okay we need to work
on this an 8-year-old berer people are
starting to be concerned I think even
without knowledge of the Psychopathology
literature one would be very concerned
if their eight-year-old is biting other
kids not just because of the damage
induced but it's so very different and
so much more primitive than than even
hitting or spitting or something exactly
it's it's the indication of a virtual
absence of sophisticated socialization
they are truly in their hypothalamus
yeah yeah right exactly and that's well
especially if you have a hypothalamus
that's tilted towards rage let's say and
and defensive or predatory aggression
that's bad news now so
so so so what's the what's the upshot of
that well the upshot is
that there is a sub that's right there's
a subset of kids whose whose default
reactions aren't socialized and we
associate that with psychopathy and
long-term criminality there's a really
useful thing to understand that much of
what we see as pathology and I would say
the same thing about narcissism and and
and certain forms of
Hedonism essentially what it is is
failure of socialization right and this
has very interesting political
implications because it also implies
that imagine
that impulsive self-gratification is a
personality the desire for impulsive
self-gratification is a personality with
its own political opinions nche said in
the late 1800s that every Drive attempts
to philosophies in its Spirit brilliant
a brilliant
observation far different than
conceiving of the say hypothalamic
drives as deterministic chains of only
impulses and another thing to consider
too with regards to the effect of
hypothalamic motivation on perception
that mouse that you talked about who's
attack system is activated
electronically see when that glove is
dropped you can see that there's a
relationship with perception because if
there's no target for attack that's
biologically relevant in the environment
there's no impulse so you could imagine
that what happens is when you activate
those neurons is that there's a set of
perceptual stimuli that are much more
likely to be classified as a defeatable
enemy now even a glove will do it right
right so you drop in a glove and that's
now per ceed as defeatable enemy or
perhaps threat because we don't know
exactly what the perception would be but
then you see then it's the perception
driving the behavior that's not an
Impulse right right that's more like a
strategy and that's it's un I really
started to understand some of the
literature on the evolution of religious
thinking when I started to understand
motivational States as personalities
because one of the things that you see
this is so cool something I tried to
talk to Dawkins about the the greatest
historian of religions who ever lived
was mer eliad and he wrote a sequence of
brilliant books um the sacred and the
profane is the best one to start with
very short book very elegant book and
what
ilad documented across the world was the
pattern by which polytheistic belief
systems turned into monotheistic belief
systems that parallels maturation it's
the same thing and so the polytheistic
Gods tend to be rep representations of
of motivational States I I I'm going to
pause you there because I think this is
extremely important um so the god of
war or the god of love the goddess of
love or the god of love exactly exactly
that um so the idea that the different
gods are the uh reflective of different
let's just let's just we'll just say it
as as neuroscientists as different
hypothalamic and and related circuits
well why wouldn't they be Gods you know
beware of falling under their minion
beware of becoming their play things and
the other thing that's very interesting
you see is that you have to also
understand that these don't exist
independently of historical context so
let's say rage it's like there's a
there's a there's a literature of Rage
there's a culture of Rage there are
patterns of Rage that are played out in
drama and literature like it's not only
that the motivational impulse is a
personality it's a personality with a
history and a philosophy and if you
don't think think it can possess you you
don't know very much about possession so
like for example if you're fighting with
someone and you and you become enraged
as you said your temporal purview
shrinks and your notion of what
constitutes Victory is radically
transfigured so if you're fighting with
someone you love you might want to
defeat them or even hurt them
independently of the fact that you
actually love them well then you think
well you're you're gripped by these
impulses no no you're inhabited by the
spirit of Rage
and if you're a sophisticated person
there's going to be an endless stream of
sophisticated intellectual
rationalizations that come along with
that possession right it's full-fledged
personality and
it's one of the things you see with
people who are psychotic you know who
drift off into the landscape of their
imagination is that they dwell on such
states of possession so for example
these kids that shoot up High School
like they're fantasizing under the
influence of rage and resentment for
thousands of hours that just takes
control of them and it's not it's not a
simple impulse it's like no they've
they've inverted the you could think
they've inverted the neurological order
and the god of rage is now the what
would you say the leading personality of
integration or the god of resentful rage
even worse and the circuit May R run in
reverse my colleague David Spiegel at
who's our uh Vice chair of Psychiatry at
Stanford has done some beautiful
experiments examining the relationship
between uh prefrontal cortical areas and
the insula a brain area that has a map
of our internal body State interoception
you know our ability to sense our
internal workings Etc in any event there
are certain conditions including
depression where the direction of flow
between the prefrontal cortex and the
insula literally reverses it's like
running against the typical traffic this
is a very different example because here
you're presenting in the context of Rage
or and sociopathy and and these kids who
um shoot up schools but I do absolutely
subscribe to what you just said that if
one drops into one of these more
primitive States and emotions and all
the things that go with it for a very
long time it's almost as if um the
governor which is the prefrontal cortex
starts to become the Govern that the
whole circuit starts to run from bottom
up as opposed to top down yeah yeah
defin and I think there's good
neurological that's what happens in
addiction mhm right so you hit you hit
that circuit that's seeking the drug
with repeated doses of dopamine you know
people say they have a monkey on their
back it's like no they have a monster in
their brain and it's and they grew it
and it grows because it's reinforced
with dopaminergic hits and as it grows
its capacity to dominate increases and
so when there's a cue for the addiction
this is why people relapse when they get
out of a treatment center they'll go
back to their normal environment after
having dealt with the physiological
withdrawal let's say and acute craving
will make itself manifest like a friend
they Freebase with and it's all of a
sudden that monster is alive and it just
shuts everything else down and it's got
a personality it can lie you know one of
the Hallmarks of adictive behavior is
lying and the lies are the
rationalizations of that subcircuit
subpersonality for its own pathological
behavior and so and that's all
reinforced too by the dope and energic
hits it's like there's multiple people
in there in
in everyone one of the most incredible
polytheistic paganism polytheistic yeah
that's the default condition right right
that's the condition of the
2-year-old I'd like to take a quick
break and thank our sponsor ag1 ag1 is
an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic
drink with adaptogens I've been taking
ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted
that they're sponsoring this podcast the
reason I started taking ag1 and the
reason I still take ag1 is because it is
the highest quality and most complete
foundational nutritional supplement what
that means is that ag1 ensures that
you're getting all the necessary
vitamins minerals and other
micronutrients to form a strong
foundation for your daily Health ag1
also has probiotics and prebiotics that
support a healthy gut microbiome your
gut microbiome consists of trillions of
microorganisms that line your digestive
tract and impact things such as your
immune system status your metabolic
Health your hormone health and much more
so I've consistently found that when I
take ag1 daily my digestion is improved
my immune system is more robust and my
mood and mental focus are at their best
in fact if I could take Just One
supplement that supplement would be ag1
if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to
drink a1.com huberman to claim a special
offer if you'd like to try ag1 you can
go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a
special offer right now they're giving
away five free travel packs and a year
supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's
drink a1.com huberman to claim that
special offer today's episode is also
brought To Us by Roa Roa makes
eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of
the absolute highest quality I'm excited
to share that Roa and I have teamed up
to create a new style of red lens
glasses these red lens glasses are meant
to be worn in the evening after the sun
goes down they filter out short
wavelength light that comes from screens
and from LED lights the sorts of LED
lights that are most commonly used as
overhead and frankly lamp lighting
nowadays I want to emphasize Roa red
lens classes are not traditional blue
blockers they're not designed to be worn
during the day and to filter out blue
light from screen light they're designed
to prevent the full range of wavelengths
that suppress melatonin secretion at
night and that can alter your sleep so
by wearing Roa red lens glasses they
help you calm down and they improve your
transition to sleep most nights I stay
up until about 10: p.m. or even midnight
and I wake up between 5:00 and 7:00 a.m.
depending on when I went to sleep now I
put my Roa red lens glasses on as soon
as it gets dark outside and I've noticed
a much easier transition to sleep which
makes sense based on everything we know
about how filtering out shortwave
lengths of light can allow your brain to
function correctly Roa red lens glasses
also look cool frankly you can wear them
out to dinner or to concerts or out with
friends so it turns out it is indeed
possible to support your biology to be
scientific about it and to remain social
after all if you'd like to try Roa go to
roka.com that's r.com and enter the code
huberman to save 20% off your first
order again that's r.com and enter the
code huberman at checkout one of the
most
remarkable real life examples I've ever
witnessed of the power of belief in God
I'm just going to say it as as it
occurred uh I have a good friend um who
for many years struggled with alcohol
and drug addiction of multiple kinds
incredibly kind person incredibly
successful in his career married two
beautiful children multiple relapses
yeah crashed his truck at 7 in the
morning after getting intoxicated at
6:30 in the morning got out of that one
happened again and again multiple rehab
centers of the sort of standard
treatment Etc and then ultimately enough
happened within that whole set of
circumstances that his wife said you
know this is it you've got to solve this
or we just can't be with you very scary
situation for everybody involved
including him who absolutely adored his
family he told us uh his friends that he
was going to go to a a a center here in
Los Angeles that treats addiction with
essentially religion a belief in God he
was already fairly religious um most
most Sundays he attended church and
things of that sort and you can imagine
we all thought including myself
like okay dude like good luck yeah I
hope this works but like I would say a
zero minus one confidence in his ability
to get and stay sober he just had not
succeeded prior to
this he's been sober more than four
years now he got out of there and never
looked back and I wonder now uh whether
something something must have changed in
his brain by adopting what was
essentially a different incentive
structure right different incentive
structure but fear wasn't doing it
before fear of extreme consequences
which were on the table at that time um
when he went in weren't enough something
about going there and the work that he
did there allowed him to then it's
almost like he he got another prefrontal
cortex a more powerful prefrontal cortex
so maybe we could talk about that well
that's a that's not a bad way of
thinking about what it is that people
are trying to do when they say pray MH
they
so you can invite in
spirits to possess you that's a good way
of thinking about it I know that's odd
terminology but that's what you do when
you dwell on your
rage right right now imagine that you're
doing that in the most positive possible
Direction so what you're doing is you're
generating a hypothesis about the mode
of conduct and perception that would
best typify you if you were ideal and
then establishing a relationship with
that and inviting it in that's what the
in Evangelical protest are doing when
they formulate a personal relationship
with Jesus Christ that's exactly what
they're doing now on the addiction side
so I studied alcoholism for years that
was the T Target of my dissertation in
the first 20 papers that I published I
knew the alcoholism literature very well
and the neurological end of it as well
and it was known among alcohol
researchers been known for 60 years more
even that the most reliable treatment
for alcoholism was religious
transformation that's and this is well
accepted among researchers in the field
who have no religious affiliation
whatsoever and I do believe that a huge
part of that is a consequence of
incentive restructuring so you said for
example with your friend that fear
wouldn't work well alcohol is a pretty
good an anxiolytic drug but it's also
for people who are prone to alcoholism
it's a good incentive reward Source Like
Cocaine if you're going to you can't get
rats addicted to cocaine if they live in
a natural environment they have to be
isolated in a cage before they'll bar
press to their own death for cocaine so
one of the things you want to do when
you treat addiction is you want to
substitute a new incentive structure
right because the Part Of The Addictive
process
is you fall into a false incentive
pattern right because cocaine makes you
feel like you're doing something useful
in respect to an important goal even
though you're not it's it mimics that
even if you know you're not even if you
know it's I've never done cocaine I
would be open about it if I had I I I
think I like dopaminergic States enough
that I've been um very scared of doing
it frankly also it wasn't around much
just because of when I went to college
it just wasn't a drug that was around
much but it's a remarkable drug in the
sense that people who take cocaine seem
to be excited about everything they're
in this High dopaminergic State and
their brain becomes exceptionally good
at finding cocaine even in the absence
of resources which is pretty remarkable
if you think about it you know I mean
most people can't find the or get the
thing they want in the absence of the
resources to get it but people who take
hard drugs that really Spike dopamine
somehow manage yeah sure sometimes
they Li and Ste extremely steal but
they'll do other things too right
they'll socialize with people that have
it so they don't have to lie cheat and
steal it's it's it's incredible to see
that drug and things like
methamphetamine take over people's minds
and now I'm thinking the pathway appears
when the aim is firmly in mind right see
this is another this is another
insistence that's derived from the
religious literature so because the idea
there is that if your aim is upward the
pathway forward to that will make itself
manifest and that's true you just
pointed out that it was true in
relationship to addiction right is that
if once that once you're in that realm
of possessed personality the pathway
forward will show itself to you even
under straightened circumstances right
and it's partly because you can think of
our per ctual systems and our emotional
systems for that matter as navigating
tools right so now the addiction the
addicted brain what they see the aim is
possessed by the substance of addiction
right so now the highest God is cocaine
let's say and so now all Pathways in the
world are Pathways to cocaine all
objects in the world are markers on the
pathway to cocaine because it just
dominates but it's not it's not just an
Impulse it dominates the perceptual
landscape as well that makes it and the
emotional landscape and it comes with
all these rationalizations that's all
those lies right the whole thing it's a
whole Personality yeah brutal brutal
nowadays I get a lot of questions um
about
pornography and the the discussion
around pornography is always related to
the discussion around
masturbation um but let's just talk
about pornography for a moment in this
context of these primitive drives and
these circuits within the hypothalamus
which we were all born with that um
clearly some of them are devoted to our
progression as a species through
reproduction zero question about that
sexual behavior being linked to
reproduction not always but certainly we
can all agree on that I a necessary
precondition I hope we can still all
agree on that but um last time I checked
that's still true a sperm and an egg met
someplace in some context to create all
of us okay we're still grounded in
that pornography is something that I
hear quite a lot from typically young
males but sometimes young females or
even older females who say that they can
see themselves trying to resist the
desire to go look at it and it almost
doesn't feel like a desire anymore
they're sort of just in a um kind of a a
compulsion that is that is almost
unconscious but they're just aware of
the fact that disorder like an disorder
they're doing it they know they
shouldn't be doing it and they can't
help themselves and we could think about
two ways to attack this if one believes
it's a real concern and they certainly
do so I do um I don't I would be open if
I if I had or do I pornography is not
been my thing and and I don't struggle
with it but but when I hear from these
people it's so clear that they're asking
is it the prevalence of pornography out
there or is it something really broken
in them like are they broken but I don't
know that I would say after having the
discussion we've had thus far that
they're broken it seems to me that it's
like like the as you said it's the
manifestation of one part of
their it's one personality within them
well and it's been it's been
compulsively rewarded so you know when
when a when you see yourself moving
towards the culmination of a desired
goal a dopamine that's accompanied by
dopamine release okay and so two things
you know this but everybody who's
listening might not there's two elements
to that dopamine release one is pleasure
but the other is that the dopamine
imagine that there are circuits
activated as you're acting what the
dopamine does is increase the
probability that the circuits were that
were activated just before the positive
experience happened grow okay so now if
you're engaged with pornography and that
culminates in SE in in successful sexual
satiation which it can that's what
masturbation does then the whole
personality that's oriented toward that
set of stimuli is going to come to
dominate it's very much like an
addiction except it's
it's you know there there has been
there's been work done with generally
simpler animals on these phenomena
called super stimuli I think it's
stickleback fish where this was first
observed so
males I hope I get this right but I've
got it approximately right I believe
it's male
sticklebacks will they're are very
agressive towards other male
sticklebacks and the reason they're
aggressive is because the other male
sticklebacks have a red dot on their
bellies so they don't like red dotts at
all and so you can really enrage a
stickleback with a red dot and if you
use a red dot that's a little bigger and
a little brighter than the typical Red
Dot you get a super stimulus it's
virtually irresistible to the stickle
back and it's weird because the maximal
activation is produced by a stimulus
that they wouldn't see in nature it
slightly exceeds that's exactly what
pornography does it's a super stimulus
right and it's not surprising that young
males in particular are acceptable to
that because male sexuality in human
beings is very visually oriented very
and a lot of our brain is visual way
more than virtually every other animal
certainly every other primate and ver
and every other mammal and so we have a
situation where any 13-year-old boy can
see more hyper attractive super stimulus
women in one day than the most
successful man who ever lived a 100
years ago would have ever seen in his
whole life yeah well that's a like an
evolutionary ecological radical
ecological transformation and the and
it's worse because it's easily
accessible so it takes no work right so
not only is it a super stimulus it's one
that's at hand so to speak and the uh
and the uh the analog in the food world
would bear highly palatable highly
processed food yeah sugar fat
combination you go into the other day I
went into a gas station to use the
restroom because I was traveling home
for Thanksgiving and and I looked around
I and I I thought this isn't a
convenience store this is a pharmacy
right everything that had chocolate also
also seemed to have caffeine and color
everything every drink seemed to combine
not just sugar but also caffeine and
some other things that would provide s
stimulants then you've got nicotine and
and these things on their own aren't
necessarily bad any one of these one
elements in low low enough doses in
frequent use Etc but maybe sugar being
the one that that clearly I think uh
deserves um deeper investigation right
um but it just occurred to me much
different than difference between
manufacturing sugar and Manufacturing
cocaine I mean you take something that's
available in its natural form in
relatively low concentrations and purify
it I mean cocoa leaves the natives used
cocoa leaves forever as mild stimulant
didn't seem to cause them any trouble
but that's way different than cocaine
right and sugar has the same arguably
the same pathological properties well I
didn't think we were going to go here
but I think it's extremely appropriate
and important that we do so I I know
that you followed what is essentially an
Elimination Diet for a number of years
you eat meat right um I eat meat
vegetables fruit and um some starches
unrefined starches in any event one
thing that I is absolutely clear from
following a clean diet so to speak of
any kind but let's say of the sort that
you follow or I
follow is that you very soon learn the
relationship between Taste of the food
volume of the food
macronutrient so protein fat or
carbohydrate content
micronutrients and satiation which is if
you think about it it's sort of like a
big plate of broccoli or a big steak or
something the brain learns and the
hypothalamus learns the association
between the taste the caloric content
what else is in there and satiation if
you think about highly processed food or
even combinations of multiple
ingredients that's absolutely impossible
to do the brain can't parse what are the
various things in here and how do they
relate to my feelings of satisfaction
it's the difference between a super drug
and what I believe are the the elements
that were explain explain why you think
that's that link learned link about
satiation can't be learned in the case
of these processed foods yeah because in
the context of these processed foods
they're activating multiple neuron
systems in the hypothalamus and gut we
know that the gut has neurons that can
respond to Sugar fatty acids and amino
acid content and there's a you know this
prominent theory that you know one of
the main reasons we eat is to forage for
amino amino acids that we'll eat until
we get enough of the essential amino
acids and and we correlate that with
taste but that the gut has neurons we we
know the gut has neurons that signal
through the Vegas up through a little
relay called the noo gangling if you
want to look at it fun um fun name and
then up to the dopaminergic centers of
the brain which make us oh when we eat
something that has a high uh essential
amino acid content like a steak like a
really tasty steak the neurons in the
gut in a way that is independent of
taste are signal in to the brain ah I'm
getting essential amino acids you should
eat more of this thing if those let's
just say a small fraction of those amino
acids that are present in a candy bar in
a you know a package of of Skittles
which I'm I'm guessing there's very few
of them if any you're going to continue
to forage for food because those neurons
will also respond to Sugar basically it
will keep you eating until you get
enough of those amino acids in other
words there are two parallel tracks one
within our system Pathways to satiation
that totally right multiple Pathways to
satiation one depending on taste one
dependent on actual nutrient content the
mouth can only learn taste Association
the mouth can't actually learn nutrient
content the gut knows nutrient content
the problem is you take a food that is
low in a micronutrient or macronutrient
or essential amino acids or essential
fatty acids after all there are no
essential carbohydrates there are only
essential amino acids and essential
fatty acids right right right and it
will keep you eating and it will keep
the appetite system revving until you
get enough of those now here's the issue
if you've ever done this
that's empty calories empty calories but
so so in some ways um you know this
again is an analog to the whole
discussion around pornography
masturbation and and reproduction right
I'm not saying that reproduction is the
be all end all of sexual activity but in
the evolutionary sense it absolutely is
right there's no question about that
there's no moral judgment there that's
just the reality so the the the the
situation with food is is the following
if we are eating without any gut Level
under understanding of what what's
coming in we will keep eating if you let
me give an example you probably haven't
done this experiment in a while but if
you've ever just had you know ribeye
steak or two it's pretty satiating maybe
you also have a salad if you're me or
some broccoli or something like that if
one takes then even after you've eaten
all that one bite of pasta one bite of
pasta the the next impulse is more yes
right even though you already have
enough essential amino acids from those
steaks you're loosing you know uh
threshold you've reached that Etc all
the the good stuff why because blood
glucose goes up and then you desire more
because blood glucose elevations are
linked directly to the dopaminergic
system so what I'm basically trying to
say here is that I do think that there
are elements to our food modern food if
you will it seems like it's you know
anything but modern in the sense that
it's worse for us than the more
primitive foods but highly processed
foods pornography any drug that spikes
dopamine dramatically like
methamphetamine for instance any
behavior that spikes dopamine
dramatically that
very quickly hijacks these circuits and
to me the way to to teach those circuits
a a calmer more um prudent version of
themselves right to enter a different
hypothalamic uh activation pattern is to
start breaking the things down into
their Essential Elements right about the
motivation the pleasure Etc to Tamp all
that down I mean we know that for
pornography if the pornography is very
extreme then less extreme pornography
doesn't seem to work well that's because
there's also a novelty kick in
dopaminergic striving right I mean so
with
any basic repetitive pleasure there's a
dopaminergic kick but with any novelty
there's also a dopaminergic kick so
there's an optimized threshold for
novelty and repetitive striving that
plays out in pornography so
um there's the direct effect of the
stimulus as such but the there's
variation in the stimulus that's also
novel and so you it's a common pattern
for pornographic usage to become
more what would you say fetishistic
that's one way of thinking about it as
it progresses because that that keeps
the novelty alive that's very dangerous
that's a very dangerous development
right and I would venture in a very
different domain that if you were to eat
your steaks slathered in barbecue sauce
for a couple of weeks going back to the
way that you eat them now which by the
way this is a great opportunity to
educate people about something that you
taught me when we had dinner last which
is that if you're going to order a steak
order a Pittsburgh Char the Char on the
outside is incredibly tasty they're we
love that the Umami taste is that we you
have a devoted taste receptor that it's
complex yeah so and if they don't know
what a Pittsburgh Char is then maybe
you're in the wrong restaurant or you
need to educate them but incredibly
satiating delicious right but if you
were to slather those steaks in in a
bunch of things I would suspect that
after a while your plain steaks wouldn't
taste as good but certain but the way to
make them taste good again would be to
eat them plain for a period of time in
which the stuff the all the condiments
Etc would start to become aversive I do
believe that when we return to the the
sort of most um naturally satisfying
mode of engaging with these uh with
these circuits here we're talking about
food and sex in parallel that they
become especially satiating and I think
that you know in hearing from all these
people that are addicted to pornography
and they're not addicted like they
telling me they love it and they can't
stop they're telling me it's no longer
working for them that the that there's
this you know diminishment in the amount
of dopamine that they're getting over
time and they feel trapped within it and
they have no sense whatsoever because
they haven't been socialized you to go
out and find a real relationship a real
sexual relationship or a relationship of
any well it also it's also there is some
evidence suggesting too that if you've
been socialized into pornography
sexuality it's actually quite difficult
to establish a sexual relationship with
an actual partner now I would say to
some degree that's always been difficult
because it's a complex form of Behavior
but the introduction of
pornography well it sets up a whole
landscape of expectation for example
that's not necessarily going to play out
that well in the real world let's say
and and there's also a learning of those
biological systems in the brain to um
evoke arousal by observing sex as
opposed to participating complet
completely different so some of these um
right that's voer right you're basically
learning to be a Voyer right right and
so you think about young brains that are
highly plastic yeah learning that so the
returning yeah we have no idea what to
make of that because especially for
young men because when they hit puberty
sexuality becomes a very uh insistent
force and we have no idea what effect
pornography has on the development of
male sexuality
none I've wondered for a while whether
there's
something inherently
rewarding about creating impact or
action at a distance here's why I've
been watching these videos of elon's
rockets and thinking like that is
awesome that is awesome we're built on a
throwing platform you know yeah just
there's one image of the of the the
rocket thrusters that just captivated me
I'm I'm not a spacecraft guy I mean I
think it's really cool but I wouldn't
consider myself somebody that like looks
at the stars and thinks I want to go you
I want to go up there I might if I give
the opportunity that's not been my thing
but I looked at this and I thought what
an awesome Display of Power but then I
was saying like what is power it's
really about having impact or action at
a distance when we were kids we like
dirt claw Wars targeted right what what
an incredible display of funneling the
laws of physics and Engineering into
something that can have enormous action
at a distance and perhaps even take us
into new galaxies amazing right the word
sin in many languages means to miss the
Target right and and it it speaks to
exactly what you're describing like that
that the cache of action at a distance
that's unbelievably deeply embedded in
us that's why I made that throwing
gesture like human beings throw that's
our physiology right we can throw
something at a distant Target well
that's structured our our cognition
we're using our thoughts to hit distant
targets that's what we do all the games
that young men play so many of those
games are Target games all of the sports
spectacles that people want to
participate in vicariously even
vicariously they're Target hitting games
like our gaze specifies as the center of
a Target there's targets everywhere and
we're unbelievably focused on Bridging
the Gap between where we are and where
we're going yeah that's the whole
perceptual
landscape I'd like to take a quick break
and thank one of our sponsors function I
recently became a function member after
searching for for the most comprehensive
approach to lab testing while I've long
been a fan of blood testing I really
wanted to find a more in-depth program
for analyzing blood urine and saliva to
get a full picture of my heart health my
hormone status my immune system
regulation my metabolic function my
vitamin and mineral status and other
critical areas of my overall health and
vitality function not only provides
testing of over 100 biomarkers key to
physical and mental health but it also
analyzes these results and provides
insights from Top Doctors on your
results results for example in one of my
first tests with function I learned that
I had two high levels of mercury in my
blood this was totally surprising to me
I had no idea prior to taking the test
function not only helped me detect this
but offered medical doctor informed
insights on how to best reduced those
mercury levels which included limiting
my tuna consumption because I'd been
eating a lot of tuna while also making
an effort to eat more leafy greens and
supplementing with Knack and
acetylcysteine both of which can support
glutathione production and
detoxification a and worked to reduce my
mercury levels comprehensive lab testing
like this is so important for health and
while I've been doing it for years I've
always found it to be overly complicated
and expensive I've been so impressed by
function both at the level of ease of
use that is getting the test done as
well as how comprehensive and how
actionable the tests are that I recently
joined their Advisory Board and I'm
thrilled that they're sponsoring the
podcast if you'd like to try function go
to function health.com huberman function
currently has a weight list of over
250,000 people but they're offering
Early Access to huberman lab listeners
again that's function health.com
huberman to get early access to function
so this thing about action at a distance
to me feels like so inherent to our
progression as a species most
Technologies are about that in fact if
you think about social media you know
somebody tweets something and you know
when people react to it maybe positively
or negatively the school shooter in a
very dark example a sad a tragic example
right action at a distance
then you think about pornography and
masturbation and I'm not passing any
moral judgment here it's a the ultimate
form of creating action at a distance
would be to create a new human being
with somebody right I mean that's it's
you're propagating it in physical
distance creating a new being and in
time right I mean incredible and then
you think about masturbation and you
think about pornography and there is no
action at a distance and I'm not just
punning here I mean literally there's
not much action at a distance it's all
up close to oneself but there's there's
no impact on anybody it's almost as if
the energy that we're born with to be
able to
create positive things to evolve our
species through action at a distance
through creation of knowledge technology
children communities
culture the ultimate expression it's
just loop back into oneself it's it's as
if and and I I don't know what language
there is for this in biology but it's as
if like all that dop energic Drive is
just kind of looped back into oneself
and it goes nowhere and I think when I
hear about the incredibly like what the
language for it is only like the
diminished Souls of these people who are
coming to me saying like you know like
help and I'm thinking okay listen I'm a
podcaster I'm a scientist I know some
things about the dopaminergic system but
you know there are ways that they can
get help I think they're 12-step
programs for this and so forth and other
things but you know I think what they're
saying is that they're they're just kind
of dissolving in their own um
in their own reflex but there's no
action at a distance for them this is
the same thing I see with the Failure to
Launch kids who are still living at home
who are not having any action at a
distance I think we were designed to
disperse from our families and to create
action at a distance up until a certain
age but I see so many of the problems
that we face as failure to find a
productive way to have action failure
Venture I would say in in the ter
techology that I've been developing so
for example in this in this book and we
who wrestle with God I'm one of the
stories I analyze is the story of
Abraham and it's very interesting story
psychologically I mean I think it's it's
it's stunning actually and I'll lay some
of that out for you you can tell me what
you think about it so so the Divine is
characterized in the classic stories of
our culture as um the ultimate up so you
could think about the Divine
as the target as such rather than any
particular Target so here's a way of
thinking about it you
know so an ambition will seize you and
then you'll aim at fulfilling that
ambition but once the ambition is
fulfilled a new ambition makes itself
manifest which might be a greater
ambition let's say if if your
personality is expansive and then if you
fulfill that the same thing will happen
so then you could imagine that there's a
meta ambition
behind all proximal Ambitions okay now
the Divine characterization of the
Divine is a characterization of that
meta ambition that's a good way of
thinking about it so it's something that
recedes as you approach it but it's also
the thing that all Ambitions have in
common and we know there is such a thing
because otherwise we wouldn't have a
concept of ambition right which speaks
to a commonality among Ambitions okay in
the story of Abraham the Divine is
characterized in relationship to
something like ambition so
Abraham has the he's already immersed in
a situation that's Akin in a way to the
scenario of a wealthy and a a person in
the modern world who's in a situation of
abundance Abraham's parents are
wealthy and they provide for him there's
nothing he needs to do and in
consequence so he's attained the
Socialist Utopia or the cons humorist
Utopia you can look at it either way
and there's no reason for him to move
forward so he doesn't he doesn't do
anything till he's 75 and then the voice
comes to him which is the voice of
Adventure and it's God in this story
that's how God is defined right and God
says to
Abraham you have to leave all this
Comfort which is a very interesting
proposition to begin with it's like why
the hell hell would you leave that when
you have everything you need well the
implication is is that you don't have
everything you need when you're being
delivered everything you need that isn't
how life works okay so God says you have
to leave your your father's tent you
have to leave your tribe you have to
leave those who speak your language you
have to venture out into the world so
God is conceptualized in this story as
the impulse the voice that compels you
out into the world and that encourages
you to do so so that's a hypothesis
about what the ultimate up is okay and
Abraham agrees and he does so in two
ways he he builds an
altar signifying his aim that he's going
to abide by the command of this voice or
the invitation of this voice and that
he'll make the appropriate sacrifices
there a crucial there's a crucial it's a
crucial point to understand
because the process of transformation
requires sacrifice to be more than you
are means you have to let go of that
which you were you have to make
sacrifices now Abraham's life is
punctuated by a sequence of
reaffirmations of his upward aim and
declamations of his willingness to
sacrifice every time he finishes an
adventure he re constitutes the Covenant
right so this is this agreement to
follow the voice of Adventure
okay God makes him a deal that's the
Covenant it's very interesting deal so
now imagine biologically speaking that
there is an instinct to integrate that
operates within us okay so now it's not
it's just as fundamental as the
hypothalamic motivational States let's
say but it's more sophisticated and what
it's trying to do is to integrate all
the motivational States across time and
socially right and then IM imagine it
manifests itself as an instinct to be
something like the instinct to
mature right to move forward right to
leave your zone of comfort right and
maybe there have been people like chicks
Mahi who've characterized that as the
attractiveness of flow and maybe it's
associated with the exploratory circuit
in the hypothalamus that's mediated by
dopamine okay but it's it's got its
character now the character of that
instinct in this story is the way it's
characterized is as the voice of
Adventure so it's the thing that asks
you to move beyond your zone of comfort
and go into the foreign world now the
advantage to that is that you fortify
yourself and you develop right so no
matter how good you are now if you push
yourself to the edge you're going to be
better than you are and that's a
better win than merely being good like
you are now so that would be particip a
in that transformative process is a
higher form of attainment than mere
attainment of any specific goal okay so
that's the Call to Adventure that's the
call to a quest that's what Gandalf
offers Bilbo for example
okay God characterizes the consequences
of that and this is so cool it when I
figured this out it just flattened me
it's so interesting God says okay if you
God is defined as that which says this
by the way
if you push yourself beyond your zone of
comfort even if it's functioning for you
that's Abraham's situation here's
what'll
happen you'll become you'll live your
life in a manner that's a blessing to
you so that's a good deal a because Lots
the the miserable people you're talking
about the depressed people the the
trapped people their life isn't a
blessing to themselves so what's a
pathway to blessing well it's not
satiation not in this formulation it's
voluntary it's the voluntary Quest
and it's characterized by Adventure so
that's deal number one you'll live in a
life that'll be a blessing to you okay
and then God says that's not all that'll
happen you'll be a blessing to yourself
in a manner that will make you renowned
among other people
justly that's a good deal because we
know that people men in particular are
very status oriented partly because
their reproductive success is highly
correlated with their social status and
you know the Psychopaths game that but
still it's like Renown is crucially
important you want to be the quarterback
on the shoulders of your teammates you
know so that'll be the second thing that
happens and then the same voice says and
that's not all you'll be a blessing to
yourself and be renowned in a manner
that will maximize the probability that
you will establish something of lasting
value that's a good deal so that's
that's stretching across time
multi-generationally because God tells
Abraham that if he follows the path of
Adventure he'll be the father of Nations
so what that means is that he'll
establish the pattern of paternal
conduct that will
maximally that will maximize the success
of
his offspring in the longest possible
run that's so cool this is Success at a
distance and over time exactly and then
the the final offer is you'll do that in
a way that'll bring abundance to
everyone else too now so think about
what that means biologically this is so
cool and I I can't see how it can be
wrong it means that if you hearken to
the voice that calls you out of your
zone of comfort you do that voluntarily
so you put yourself on the edge of
Adventure you will be following the
Instinct that has already evolved to
make your life a blessing to yourself to
make you successful among other people
to maximize your probability of
long-term success and to do that in a
way that brings abundance to your
community and then you think look let's
take the contrary hypothesis the
contrary hypothesis would be twofold
there is no compulsion to Adventure it's
like that seems highly improbable or
that the compulsion to Adventure isn't
aligned with psychological and social
well-being well what's the what's the
chance that the fundamental drive that
would facilitate your transformation
across time would not be aligned with
your psychological integrity and the
success of the community like we
wouldn't be social animals if that was
the case so as far as I can tell
that has to be true now that doesn't
mean you can get lost in false
Adventures that can happen that's what
an addiction is or like or or that's
what pornography is it's a false
Adventure right it's failure to hit the
proper Target you might say but that
Central Drive to integration across time
and communally why wouldn't that be an
instinct and then we could cap that with
an observation that I also think is
self-evidently true once you understand
it
so imagine that you're a father now this
Spirit of Adventure is often
characterized paternally right in so far
as God's the father in these ancient
stories so think about this so when you
see your son now it's also true of your
daughter but I'll focus on Sons for the
moment when you see your son and you
love your son when you see your son
pushing himself Beyond his own limits in
an adventurous manner if you're a good
father you def definitely encourage that
right and I would say in so far as you
encourage that you are a good father and
that would mean that you're the
embodiment of that spirit that calls to
Adventure that's why Abraham is
characterized for example in this story
as forging an alliance with the spirit
of his ancestors with the deity of his
ancestors he's embodying the Call to
Adventure and that's what makes him the
father whose reproductive Enterprise is
successful across the broadest possible
span of time I think that's I just can't
see how that can be wrong and that's a
characterization of the Divine there
there's other it it complexifies a
because what what the stories are trying
to do is
to give you an image of what that
integrating personality might be like
and it's sophisticated so a single
characterization is insufficient so in
the story of
Noah God is this personality is
characterized quite differently so Noah
is presented as a man who's wise in his
Generations which means that for his
time and place he's moral and reputable
so he's the sort of guy that people
would go to for advice because he's
lived a life that's emblematic of his
wisdom let's say okay now a voice comes
to him and says batting down the hatches
there mate trouble's coming okay so so
here's the hypothesis the hypothesis is
the voice that calls to the wise to
prepare in times of trouble is a
manifestation of the Divine and it's the
same as the voice that calls the
unwilling to Adventure that's the
monotheistic hypothesis and so you can
see what the imagination is doing is
agglomerating these different
characterizations of high aim insisting
that there's an integrated Unity behind
them and then trying to conceptualize
that integrated Unity across time and so
and I think that's done I think that's
done with radical success in the
biblical library that the culmination of
the library of stories is
the impressionistic representation of
this integrating pattern and I think
that's what people call on when they're
engaging in a religious Enterprise that
is radically successful like that
happened in the case of your friend
right so he got a new personality and
that new personality had different
incentive structure and so that just
superseded the addiction it's almost as
if I mean I realize that for people
listening it might not seem like this
but to us his friends who had seen him
try so hard in the context of people he
truly deeply cares about more than
anybody in the world his children his
wife it was almost like he got a brain
transplant it was it was
astonishing how does he account for it
like if you asked him like okay you had
every reason to change and yet you
didn't and then all of a sudden you did
like how does he understand that he uses
very
um uh
Christian religious language he said
that he felt Jesus's love for him and he
saw an image of who he could become this
was important perhaps no doubt not just
perhaps but no doubt of who he could
become that was worth it and he had the
adequate social support within this
place and so there was reinforcement
yeah but what's what's remarkable is
that he was able to take that outside of
this place it it was a residential
facility out of this place and carry it
with him and to this day he is Rock
Solid okay so in that domain and I will
say in in all the other domains of his
life too extremely successful as an
artist I don't want to out him you know
extremely successful as a as a
commercial artist and happy and in
service and um just
seems like he got a brain trans right so
there's a mystery there that's kind of
threefold one is um what the hell did he
mean that he realized that Jesus Christ
loved him right that's okay what do you
mean by that and then somehow that's
associated with the vision he developed
of who he could be if he was everything
he could be there's a relationship
between those two things and then
there's this third mystery is the
culmination of those two phenomena
freedom of his addiction even out of the
context of the center that's right very
difficult to understand that but you
know we know think about it this way if
you're possessed by
rage different phenomena have
dopaminergic cache to you than if you're
possessed by like uh sexual desire like
obviously right absolutely right so so
the idea that a given stimuli produces a
given motivational response is incorrect
because that's framework dependent right
and then most so I think one of the best
ways to understand a motivational Drive
is that a motivational Drive grips the
target it establishes the Target right
and it's not it may it may increase the
probability that certain action patterns
will make themselves manifest that would
be the kind of the compulsive element
but fundamentally what it's doing is
changing the Target that rearranges the
perceptual landscape and it transforms
the emotions because now if your target
is there things that lead you there are
dopaminergically relevant if your target
is there things that lead you there are
relevant same underlying emotion but the
the stimuli so to speak that give rise
to the emotion are radically different
so now he has a different orientation
and aim and so the incentive structure
of his psyche is radically transformed
now we know that can happen because that
happens to you when you move from one
motivated state to another I think in
12-step programs they they allow the
steps to be Milestones I mean there's
clearly a dopaminergic component I hope
people understand that dopamine is dumb
in fact dopamine isn't Dumb dopamine has
no intelligence at all it's just a
currency of motivation and reward and
what which is why it can be gained by
cocaine which is why it can be gained by
cocaine or or most anything that can you
know uh you know feret its way into the
hypothalamic system and I I hope people
picked up on what you said before
because
um it's so important that as one moves
toward a Target dopamine increases and
root to that Target I'm I'm rephrasing
what you said before you said it
wonderfully I just want to make sure
people understand that as that dopamine
increases the probability that your
perception will go to something other
than the target decreases exponentially
as you get closer and closer you get
more and more dopamine the greater the
elevation dopamine the lower the
probability that you'll engage in any
other p of self it's like it's almost or
the or personality type other than the
one that you're engaged in in pursuit of
this Behavior will emerge not least
because as you approach successfully the
probability of ultimate success is
obviously increasing so it makes perfect
sense that you would narrow and focus
right you run faster as you as you see
the Finish Line right faster and faster
I this concept of sin as missing the
Target or this definition of sin I think
is incredibly important hamartia is the
Greek word and L it's literally an
archery term but it's also the word for
sin in ancient Hebrew is also an archery
term and so and there's other languages
where that's the case but it it's really
important to understand that that is
that notion is predicated on this target
seeking phys psychophysiology and that
that's unbelievably deeply built into us
as you pointed out you know our eyes are
Target established well it's so
important to us that we infer aim from
gays right and it's more than that not
only do we infer aim from
gaze we mimic the psychophysiological
state of the Target that we're watching
as a consequence of her inference of aim
from gaze so if I can see what you're
looking at then I can occupy the same
psychophysiological state that you do
and that's the basis of my understanding
this is so important and I'm uh there's
something that I've never talked about
on this or any other podcast which is
that in humans we have a massive
expansion of an area of the frontal
cortex called The frontal eye Fields so
there's circuitry deep in the brain if
you want to look it up it's Superior
culus it's also called the tectum in
other species it means roof it's the
roof of the midbrain Etc that generate
reflexive eye movements you stimulate in
there it's like a machine in fact a
colleague of mine who's now retired at
Stanford Eric nudson who did some
beautiful work on
neuroplasticity um was describing
experiment where they take out the
frontal cortex of these owls owls are
because they um you know they don't have
much movements they move their head
almost you know almost all the way
around right we've all seen that get and
they use this for for for homing in on
their targets the owl or a monkey or a
human in the absence of a prefrontal
cortex or suppression of prefrontal
Cortex becomes like a machine you click
here they look there you click here they
look there puppies are like this kittens
are like this everything's a stimulus
why because there isn't that top- down
inhibition of those reflexes in humans
we have an area that's why a a cat with
no braid is hyp exploratory right
everything's a Target everything's a
targ everything is a Target and there's
no context dependent learning right I
love that you gave the example of the
desate cats um they even can do fictive
motion they can walk on a treadmill and
it's like with no cortex it's amazing
makes you rethink the cortex that's for
sure and humans have these frontal eye
fields which are an evolved area they're
present in other species too but they're
massively expanded in humans so this is
a a cortical area a frontal cortical
area devot oted to controlling Gaye and
the context and control of Gaye so it no
longer becomes just a reflex that you
can suppress as in the case with an
adult cat versus a kitten or a dog
versus a
puppy the frontal eye Fields actually
regulate all sorts of context dependent
like oh like he's looking at me directly
is it aggressive yeah um well then maybe
I'll activate my aggression or maybe
I'll brace my defenses or wow she's uh
we came to this party together but she
seem super interested in like directing
her gaze how are we inferring this
sometimes it's body language sometimes
it's this sometimes he looked at her
there are all these memes about this
right you know right the famous the
famous look over the shoulder meme that
seems to have taken over the internet
from time to time with the appropriate
facial response exactly so humans
have an if massively expanded notion of
what gaze is and our ability to control
gaze and understanding of gaze I just so
when when you raise this this idea that
when you raise this fact rather about
gays defining the target it'll end that
looking at others' gaze allows us to
understand what they are defining as the
target we starting to get get into
Notions of theory of mind and things of
that sort well so so what that implies
in keeping with our previous
conversation is that as you mature and
your cortex integrates and you become
cortically dominant the targets of your
gaze become voluntary right this is a
big deal because it means that you can
concentrate on the distal let's say the
temporary temporally distal at the
expense of the proximal so you know
if if you're walking down the street and
you hear a loud and sudden noise behind
you you'll do an anti-predator Crouch
and then turn and you'll do that
essentially automatically so so so curl
up turt and and you turn you turn to the
place where your stereoscopic audition
has indicated that the noise emanated
from right and so and that's automatic
that's the control of the eye gate gaze
and and well and and bodily posture by
those underly yeah this is a super has a
map of of auditory world so when you
hear something to right you turn to your
right right right and you do that before
you think right okay so that's a that's
an activation of the eye felds let's say
by these underlying motivational systems
that have this personality like autonomy
but you can you can you can Orient your
part of the religious Enterprise is to
orient your eyes heavenward
what does that mean well you can think
about it it means to search out the
north star that navigates for you
uniring regardless of the situation at
hand imagine you could progress towards
a Target in a manner that made all the
potential targets that you could
progress toward more likely it's a meta
Target you said that's what happened to
your friend right is not only did he
dispense with his addiction but all of
the things enter other Enterprises that
he was associating that that that he was
pursuing in his life became more
effective it's almost like and
I it is as if every goal was like
elevated right and it's funny because
for the first couple of months that I
was interacting with him I thought okay
okay like like he's different and and I
thought you know like most people would
you know perhaps would think like all
right let's see let's see but this has
been four years now he's very he's very
consistent with his um with his program
he you know he's involved in a program
that keeps him on track right um but
he's he's elevated and he's not talking
above people it's like he's elevated but
he's grounded when you talk to him he's
not kind of off some other place he's
actually very very present yeah and even
his text messages are very much of like
what's going on today you know asking
questions that are very much of the now
yeah and it's been a a remarkable thing
to observe well because he was about as
down in his addiction and had so much to
lose and had um essentially risked it
over and over over and over to the point
where you know I I didn't think it was
ever going to turn around and most and
all of his friends thought the same and
his wife of course is delighted and his
kids are delighted of course and um I
could say this without revealing because
no one knows I'm Godfather to his son
and his son is thriving which is
wonderful to see and I just think of
sometimes about how badly it could have
gone the other way yeah and it's
fantastic it's like it's nothing short
of spectacular okay so so let me let me
put that into a context of let's say an
archetypal story okay so I did a course
for Peterson Academy on The Sermon on
the Mount And The Sermon on the Mount is
a it's a Str it's a metag goal strategy
it's very practical it's very very
practical and it emerges out of the
biblical tradition in a very grounded
manner it's a logical extension of the
biblical ethical precursors so what
Christ says to his followers in the
course of The Sermon on the Mount is
first Orient your eyes upward okay so
that's in alignment with the notion that
the first born is to be consecrated to
God there's a meaning to that and and
the meaning is something like this
imagine that your life consists of a
sequence of episodes okay an episode has
a beginning and a middle and an end the
beginning sets the frame for the episode
so at the beginning of an Enterprise you
want to you want to lift your eyes
heavenward so you establish the highest
possible goal so that that constitutes
the frame of perception for that episode
that's the idea that's why the firstborn
should be consecrated to God so for
example in to think about it prosaically
before we sat down for our
podcast because we've done many
podcasts we we strive to inhabit the
framework that will make the podcast
most radically successful now you could
imagine that that could be subordinated
to either of our proximal desire for an
increase in short-term personal Fame
right or we could try to dominate each
other in the conversation or we could
Orient ourselves properly and we could
do what we could to pursue the track
towards Revelation so to speak and we
could Elevate our conversation in that
manner okay and that would set the frame
for the conversation and the good
podcasters always do that right they're
not playing games or if they're playing
games it's of the highest possible order
it's a quest yeah okay quest for what
enlightenment for truth right for Mutual
understanding and then maybe for the
education of those who are participating
all right so Christ says first Orient
your eyes upward right that's to love
God above all so whatever that upward
Divinity is you establish an allegiance
with that and you allow that to
determine your perceptions and your
motivations next operate under the
assumption
that other people like you participate
in that nature of that utmost aim
and treat them that
way next concentrate on the moment right
right and that's exactly right because
it's exactly right
because when you specify your aim the
pathway makes itself manifest otherwise
you could never use your senses to
orient you'd never get anywhere right so
if you aim upward to the best of your
ability then the pathway upward is what
will make itself manifest in front of
you then you have to attend to it and so
then you get this weird perverse
optimality which is you're focused on
the longest temporal scale and the
highest possible elevation and you can
make most use of what's right in front
of you and that the implication in The
Sermon on the Mount is that there's no
difference between that and
participating in life eternal as it
unfolds in the moment and I think that's
that's seems to me to be exactly right
it's exactly right and so you know I I
was I was thinking of that because you
said your friends all of your friends
Endeavors had become elevated so imagine
that one problem you might want to solve
is what your goals should be but a much
deeper problem would be how do you
conceptualize your goals in relationship
to one another across the broadest span
of time and person so that every goal
has the highest probability of
succeeding that would be like the
pursuit of a metagal I would say that's
what defines the religious Enterprise
there's another variant of that for
example so a variant of that would be
not how do you solve the problem of Any
Given thing that terrifies you but how
do you solve the problem of the class of
things that terrify you and the dragon
fight mythology is the solution to that
problem so the attitude there is you
adopt The Stance of voluntary
what a voluntary approach in the face of
Terror because that's the best meta
strategy right and that's the strategy
that works to protect you across the
largest possible array of dangerous
situations this is what we learned in as
clinical psychologists with exposure
therapy right you find the particulars
of what someone is afraid of that turns
out to be somewhat irrelevant you teach
people to voluntarily confront what
they're avoiding and that doesn't make
them them less afraid it makes them more
competent and braver and that
generalizes right and so yeah the
religious Pursuit is the pursuit of of
metag goals in relationship to positive
and negative emotion that's a good way
of thinking about
it I'd like to take a quick break and
thank one of our sponsors element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need and nothing you
don't that means the electrolytes sodium
magnesium and pottassium in the correct
ratios but no sugar we should all know
that proper hydration is critical for
optimal brain and body function in fact
even a slight degree of dehydration can
diminish your cognitive and physical
performance to a considerable degree
it's also important that you're not just
hydrated but that you get adequate
amounts of electrolytes in the right
ratios drinking a packet of element
dissolved in water makes it very easy to
ensure that you're getting adequate
amounts of hydration and electrolytes to
make sure that I'm getting proper
amounts of both I dissolve one packet of
element in about 16 to 32 ounces of
water when I wake up in the morning and
I drink that basically first thing in
the morning I'll also drink a packet of
element dissolved in water during any
kind of physical exercise that I'm doing
especially on hot days when I'm sweating
a lot and losing water and electrolytes
there are a bunch of different great
tasting flavors of element I like the
watermelon I like the raspberry I like
the Citrus basically I like all of them
if you'd like to try element you can go
to drink element.com huberman laab to
claim a free element sample pack with
the purchase of any element drink mix
again that's drink element.com huberman
laab to claim a free sample P
pack I love this idea of looking upward
and defining or at least having a sense
that there's a um internalization of the
greatest possible outcome and when I say
greatest both for ones but also for the
community right yeah that's life more
abundant or that's that's the symbolic
terminology or life in eternity both of
those are the same thing so imagine
you're fighting with your wife okay now
you're dominated by rage now the
advantage to that is you're
ready and but the disadvantage is you're
going to strive for proximal Victory
okay now you don't want to be a pushover
that's a mistake so then what could you
do instead you could pause and you could
remember okay if this could rectify
itself in the best possible manner what
would that look like well it's it's
complicated right you don't want your
wife to be defeated and you don't want
to be defeated and you want to solve the
problem but you don't want to sweep it
under the rug you want to solve it in a
way that solved that works across time
that benefits your relationship in an
upward Manner and you have to make sure
that you're not hijacked by that
hypothalamic circuit or personality as
you've you will be you if if you don't
alter your aim you will be because you
need to substitute you got to think I'd
really like to win this like I'd
seriously like to win this battle it's
like no you need something better than
that Victory and that would
be the a victory that would deepen and
enrich your relationship and help it
grow across time and then you can
remember that it's like I'm going to
listen even though I think my wife is
wrong I'm going to listen and I'm going
to see if I can find a pathway in the
argument that makes our relationship
better and then you think now you have
to really want that because if you
really want that if you if you got that
Vision fleshed out properly you'll want
that more than you'll want to win and
and then you might say well why it's
like because it's a better deal so
there's one of Christ's Parables where
he talks about a pearl of great price
which is the Pearl that a rich man would
sell everything he owns to possess and
it's it's something like a reference to
that it's like why would you ever attain
a proximal Victory if you could attain
an ultimate Victory that's the battle
let's say between the salvation of the
soul and the victory in sin that's how
the religious language would portray it
well you can win a local Victory and it
looks like it it looks like you win but
if you forgo the ultimate game that's
not a victory that's a defeat obviously
it might even be a worse defeat than if
you lost absolutely I I've been um
spouting off on social media and podcast
for a while now that any big inflection
in dopamine that isn't preceded by a lot
of effort to generate that dopamine
inflection is very dangerous think drugs
think pornography think highly processed
food Foods think anything that you know
creates this B big sense of indulgence
and pleasure without any effort is
running countercurrent to our
evolutionary wiring now you could say
well okay so what are we supposed to do
move in C no reward no reward without
commencer sacrifice that's right that's
of some sort Y and the other issue and
it's coming up again and again today and
I love that it is is this notion of the
temporal domain of rewards that exist
over multiple time scales or broader
time scales one of the things that I
feel truly lucky for um is the fact that
I went the path of science where we were
uh chuckling about this earlier um you
know a project could take a year then
you have to restart because that project
went nowhere and then you finish the
project you submit a paper the review I
mean the reward schedule in
science could take four years it's not
just about getting a degree like getting
papers through sometimes took a year
sometimes took two years you know um
sometimes things didn't go well and you
had to publish in a journal that you
wouldn't have wanted to or sometimes you
had to abandon projects altogether so my
reward system was trained up on lots of
time scales short medium longtime scales
as I've moved into podcasting the the uh
the temporal Loops are shorter they're
faster um but you know nonetheless you
know we we do long long form content and
um but you know I think platforms like X
I think are wonderful if used
appropriately I think it's especially
great nowadays frankly um and Instagram
Etc they're very useful but they train
us and I imagine they've trained the the
young brains that were weaned on them
cuz I wasn't but that were weaned on
them for fast temporal yeah uh time
scales this isn't like playing this
isn't like playing a long poker game
this is like playing the slot machine
over and over and over right um it's not
like a 4day tournament complete with
intermittent random reinforcement which
is what happens when something goes
viral unpredictably right right it's
really yeah and and then of course we
have this notion in this country that
you know in any moment it could be a
Rags to Riches or over you know some you
know overnight Fame type thing that
exists as a possibility in our culture
that in a way that it hadn't prior so I
think that one of the things that could
be useful just venturing a hypothesis
here is that young and older people
could um take a look at their life and
ask you know over what variation of time
scales do I derive reward yeah defin you
know training for a marathon is a is a
longer time scale that's also a Hallmark
of maturity yeah School degree Etc um in
business the time skills are sometimes
fast sometimes um short I think you can
ask even a better question than that the
the better question would be and this is
kind of what's referred to in The Sermon
on the Mount is how could I optimize my
long-term view well maximizing my focus
on the moment because then you get both
that's a really that's a really good
deal right because now you're conducting
yourself in a manner that works in an
itrated way that's socially
productive right and and maybe
intergenerationally socially productive
that would be the best thing to
establish that's kind of what you're
doing as a good father but you're doing
that in a manner that enables you to
also derive maximal impact from each
step you take forward in the present
so Carl friston told me we were talking
about entropy and and emotion I'd
figured out a few years ago with a
couple of my students that anxiety
signifies the emergence of entropy like
technically which I was really thrilled
about because it it gives emotion a
physical grounding like a real physical
grounding and friston surprised me
because he said he has a theory of
positive emotion that's analogous he
also knew the negative emotion he he'd
also been working in that domain he said
that you get a dopamine kick when you
reduce the entropy in relationship to a
goal and I thought oh my God that's so
cool because it means that uncertainty
is entropy when it emerges you get
anxious but when you see yourself
stepping toward w a goal you get a
dopamine kick and the reason that's an
entropy related to entropy is
because with each step successful step
you take towards a goal you reduce the
uncertainty of the pursuit which is
manifested in that phenomena you
described which is when you see the
Finish Line you start running faster
right so they're both related to entropy
well to have goals at multiple time
scales you need to be able to re in I I
love this entropy argument it makes
total sense that
you want to be able to uh withstand the
the the the periods of time when you
don't know whether or not things are
becoming more or less uncertain this is
part of becoming um an adult if you will
okay okay so yeah that was exactly the
thread so there's there's two cories of
that one is that the more valuable the
goal towards which you're progressing
the higher the dopamine kick per unit of
advancement so what that means is you
want an ultimate goal operating
in the domain of each proximal subg goal
and that's what happens with this upward
orientation it's like what you're trying
to do is to make things as good as they
could be whatever that means over the
longest possible span of time for the
largest number of people you included
now you're not going to know exactly how
to do that but that can be your goal
okay now that's going to inform your
perceptions and your perceptions of
pathway but it's also going to modify
your reward system because now every
proximal step forward is indicator of
entropy reduction in regard to that
metag goal well there isn't any by
definition there isn't anything you can
do that's more exciting than that see
that kind of explains why your friend
was able to pop out of his addictive
frame because now he's doing something
that's so
worthwhile that the temptation of
alcohol let's say pales in comparison
right right right and right it's a
rewriting of the reward contingencies
yeah yeah right exactly and and now you
can imagine that you could imagine a
situation where a
culture explores across time to find out
how to characterize that goal such that
if that goal is pursued people integrate
psychologically in a manner that
integrates them socially across large
spans of time I think that's what
happens when the
monotheistic Revelation emerges that's
ex that's what's happening from a from a
biological perspective is that we're
starting to characterize the longest
term goal yeah something like that this
is why I believe that pornography is
potentially so poisonous because the
level of uncertainty is basically zero
yeah people can access what they want to
see they can keep foraging until they
find it yeah and that's not the way that
relationships work the way relationships
work is I ask somebody out they might
say yes they might say no you got on a
date they might not want a second date
well things could progress you might
think that you're on the path to one
thing it turns out it doesn't work or
it's it's you're not compatible you know
I me that's also extremely salutary
because if you're being rejected like
say you're a foraging male and you're
being rejected all the time and you
forgo that for pornography what you're
foregoing is the corrective that all
those women are offering you like
they're rejecting you because there is
something wrong like seriously there's
something wrong and now you escape from
that you think well that's a relief
because no more rejection it's like yeah
no more rejection no more learning no
more Improvement and no possibility of
of an actual life right no action at a
distance yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah no
distal no distal accomplishment right
yeah the only implication of the
pornography masturbation scenario is
that is more pornography masturbation
that's the only implication of it that's
that's all that possibly could AR worse
than that because it's more pornography
in a degenerating game because as you
said you have to chase that novelty Edge
otherwise dopamine is driven down
further well and that means what it's
going to get more and more
extreme well that that's not a good
scenario that's not a good like what do
you mean more and more extreme exactly
like where does that end well you know a
casual glance at online pornography can
give you some real insight into where
that ends like there's that's a
bottomless pit and and in the most
pernicious possible manner because
sexual it can definitely twist itself
into pathological forms that undermine
psychological integrity and demolish
Society no we see this with people who
are highly successful who seem to have
lots of areas of their life regulated
and then you know they collapse their
lives I we sometimes see it with with
drugs of abuse as well although unless
those drugs of abuse are dopaminergic
and people have them in a in check so to
speak which is exceedingly rare yes it's
usually just a matter of time and they
they don't reach the mountain top yes
while time is the problem as we've been
pointing out let me tell you another
story this is from Revelation so
Revelation is a vision of the end of
time okay now time ends all the time
like our adventures end our lives end
our relationships end so the end has a
pattern okay Revelation is a vision of
the Eternal pattern of the end so here's
an element of the Vision it's so
remarkable I figured this out with my
friend Jonathan pasio so there's a
vision in a subvision in in the
sequential dream of revelation of the
Scarlet Beast and the of Babylon
and it's very relevant to our discussion
on pornography you'll understand it
right away so it's a vision of how
Society disintegrates okay now imagine
when Society disintegrates men
disintegrate according to their pattern
and women disintegrate according to
their pattern that makes perfect sense
right because if Society disintegrates
it's going to be men and women who
disintegrate there's no reason to assume
that their pattern of disintegration
would be identical okay Scarlet Beast is
is that's the Scarlet beast of the state
that's Babylon let's say that's the
degenerate tyrannical state has multiple
heads why because whatever United it has
vanished that's like the death of God
it's vanished and so now it's got heads
in every direction so it's confused and
it's red scared because that's that
confusion that disintegration is the
precursor to the river of blood right
the Red Sea this the swamp of chaos so
when the
patriarchal state disintegrates it loses
its unity and then it's multiple heads
right and that's that's an that's the
emblem of descent into diverse chaos and
gazes everywhere with these multiple
heads precisely precisely it's not
integrated okay now that's the
disintegration of the patriarchy you
might say a top that is
the of Babylon that's a beautiful
woman who's subordinated her psyche to
the demands of sexuality she's the
mother of all
prostitutes right so she's extremely
attractive and she's clad in gold and
she holds a cup it's very graphic
imagery that has nothing but the
consequences of her fornication in it is
this I mean I guess I will just say it
recently there's been a number of posts
on EX of this woman who had sex with 100
men in a day um and now and now she's
saying she's going to have sex with a
thousand men in a day yeah well she
seems to be rethinking her plan given
the emotional consequences she had to
her last success yeah I I must say her
mother is her finance
officer speechless um that's for sure
I'm speechless my my um response to the
uh her kind of um Post 100 men thing um
was it was hard for me to know to what
extent that was part of the the uh per
whatever performance whatever it was you
know so um it was hard for me to discern
what was really going on there I'm not a
psychologist um but anyone who saw that
would say um this is a pretty dark
situation it's way darker than anybody
who wanted to hold on to their sanity
would possibly imagine what's also dark
and I'm not saying this from a place of
moral judgment I'm just saying this from
a place of just kind of like a wow like
this woman obviously um navigating life
in this way her choice clearly um but
the fact that so many people know about
this the fact that so many PE and here
we're talking about it but I think in
service to a greater good I certainly
believe like like that this is now out
out there right it's out there um just
like seeing somebody just like seeing
somebody murder somebody in Cold Blood
we we talk about that recently a video
of of an assassination that and those
had been available before but um those
two things kind of leveled up or leveled
down you know um one's idea of of what
humans are capable of by allowing so
many acceptable what's acceptable or
desirable that's right the threshold
shifted that's for sure maybe that's the
what I'm looking for the threshold
shifted yeah okay so that's a great
example that that that young woman who's
betrayed herself in the deepest possible
Manner and all of the people that are
following her and all the young women
who are influenced by her so you have
this figure on the back of the
degenerate State that's the degenerate
feminine female sexuality commoditize
commoditized when the masculine State
degenerates that's a sign of the end of
things and that makes perfect sense
because well why wouldn't female
sexuality commoditize when the masculine
is no longer reliable it's exactly what
you'd expect you know how the story
ends there's another element to it the
degenerate state offers the of
Babylon as enticement for its
degeneration you can have everything you
want on the sexual side at the end of
that substory the state the Beast kills
the prostitute and so what that means is
that the long-term consequences of
sacrific less sexual satiety is that
sexuality itself is destroyed and I
think we're seeing that in our society
now 30% of Japanese under the age of 30
are virgins right about about the same
in South Korea right the birth rates in
those countries have plummeted like
they're way way below replacement and
and
increasingly 50% of women in in the west
are childless at 30 birth rates are way
way down and and going down as well 50%
are
childless half of them will never have a
child because 30 is already pushing it
and 95% of them will regret it we're
already in a situation in the west where
one in Four Women will be involuntarily
childless right and so it's so well
that's a good example as I said earlier
of how these things are characterized in
this symbolic language that outlines the
starkest you might say the starkest of
biological realities you said that there
was a problem you know your sense was
that there was a problem with effortless
gratification it's like well the problem
part of the problem with effortless
gratification is it destroys itself and
it's so interesting because the promise
of the sexual Revolution and the pill
was an unlimited Horizon of sexual
opportunity
okay we
know but the actual consequence of that
was appears to be that that that's
that's the pathway to the demise of
sexuality itself this was if you can't
be with the one you love Love the One
You're With the uh someone I know who
was a uh in their 20s in the 1970s
explained to me I always thought that
song was about you know if you can't be
with the the person that you you love
you know you find someone else you can
love they explain to me that's not what
that was about that was about the
wildness of the of the 70s right that
promise yeah that was about the the sort
of the um just uh promiscuity had
emerged as a as a theme of the 1970s
yeah well I mean in the aftermath of the
birth control pill it was not surprising
that people thought maybe that was
possible but that was wrong it was
seriously wrong and we're going to be
dealing with the consequences of that
for a very long time you said that the
that the patriarchy the masculine fails
before the well no that happen no say
that
so it's not causal one no no you can't
men and women degenerate at the same
rate right I mean we're involved in
feedback processes that are so tight
that there's no like there's no
oppressing women without oppressing men
there's no oppressing men without
oppressing women it's like we're we're
joined at the hip so to speak and so you
know these these these these cultures
that that that cloak women and silence
them you might think well that leads to
the domination of men it it it just
turns men into pathological tyrants like
there's there's no victory over one sex
that's a victory of any sense at all
that's it's
anti-humanity of course of course of
course there was a recent um post on X
that I that just held my gaze my
attention um where it was a back and
forth debate a pseudo political social
debate and then there were three words
that um I'll just to say that uh Mark
Andre said you know it was it was about
restoring Vigor pride and achievement
and I thought wow like he's not a
political candidate but that's a
beautiful Trifecta Vigor pride and
achievement to celebrate those and I and
I put that next to you know the the Deep
pleasure in generative action at a
distance a technological development the
Rockets um and there other Genera the
theme of the story of Abraham it's like
the
most the highest form of potential
satiation is risk risky romantic
adventure it's not satiation right
that's the wrong frame right and and so
one of the things I've noticed this is
such fun I've talked in front of I don't
know how many public audiences in the
last eight years independent of my
professorial career and th those are
large audiences um you know they must
average about 3 or 4 thousand people and
there's
one place I go that always reduces the
audience to like dead silence the
audiences are
usually quiet in the events you know and
that's one of the ways I'm sure you know
this is you want to listen to the
audience you want to stay in that zone
where no one's moving right cuz then you
know you their attention is focused and
you can hear that and you can you can I
wouldn't say you can play with it not
manipulatively but in the proper sense
of
play I learned a long while ago that
Adventure let's say is the highest form
of reward that's a good way of thinking
about it but there's a corollary to that
that conservatives need to learn because
they don't know this conservatives talk
about responsibility but they're
conscientious and so for them
responsibility is dutiful orderly
productivity it's it's conscientiousness
responsibility is a conscientious Duty
what they fail to understand is that
there's no difference between
responsibility and Adventure they're the
same thing and you can tell young men in
particular that say look you want to
have an adventure because you definitely
want an adventure you're you're like
you're built for that it will increase
your status it will improve your life
like it'll improve the probability that
you'll accomplish something you want an
adventure your every fiber of your being
is screaming for it where do you find it
you find it in the voluntary adoption of
responsibility and that's that's like
everyone needs to know that no young
person has been taught that for like
five generations this is important can
we operationalize this so in your first
book you talked about get your room in
order yeah one of the first things I do
when I wake up in the morning I look
around the kitchen I look around my room
and I try and get things in order yeah
and I I now I need that in order to be
able to think clearly but it's just a
first order of business well it's also a
great R it's a great morning ritual
because it's often the case especially
if you have a bit of a depressive tilt
that it's kind of hard to get oriented
properly in the morning you know and if
you take like I moved into a new house a
while back in in Northern Ontario and
the garage wasn't set up properly and
the first thing I did in the morning was
I went out in the garage for 10 minutes
and 10 minutes isn't very long but I
would like order one thing you know part
of the tool box or whatever and like if
you do that every day Things fall into
order pretty quickly but it was a real
relief to me in some way because I
didn't have to think about what I was
going to do when I woke up I made my bed
and then I went and fixed the garage for
like 10 minutes and you get the brain
into this into what I call linear
operations like the ability to carry out
something linearly when there's an near
infinite number of options in your phone
in the in your in your physical space I
think is so powerful because it's an
antidote to chaos a Target absolutely
certainly isn't a sinful Target you at
Le and you know it's not sin to clean
your room or to organize your space or
or the garage so so you start with it so
within the day one can do that in terms
of I um I really uh love
the the stickiness the positive
stickiness of this idea that adventure
and responsibility are the same thing
well well let's let's take that apart
because it's it's not immediately
obvious but look when you go let's say
say you go see an adventure movie James
Bond movie you know classic archetypal
action adventure movie with some romance
thrown in there um what is he doing well
difficult things he's trying to solve
crimes he's trying to catch bad guys
yeah he's trying to battle with the
forces of chaos that undermine the
international order right I mean it's
it's high order adventure and he's
putting himself at substantive risk to
do that that that's the sacrificial
element to it but everybody's gripped by
it well why because the stakes are high
what does it mean for the stakes to be
high it means the outcome matters what
does that mean it means it's a life and
death situation like none of that makes
itself present without the hoisting of a
burden and here's something else I
figured out so
remarkable so I went to the Church of
the Holy sepulture in Jerusalem which is
the first church that was the first
Christian Church that was establish
lished and hypothetically it was
established on the location of the
crucifixion right and so at the center
of the church is an altar and at the
center of the altar is the image of this
crucifixion right which is a sacrificial
image okay crucifixion sacrificial image
altar church then around the church is
the community and then that becomes the
pattern for European towns right and all
the towns that everyone wants to go
visit in Europe have that pattern
okay so why well responsible sacrific is
at the core of the
community that's what's dramatized in
all that in that architecture in that in
that sacred architecture in the
actual in in the in the structure of the
community with its Center well of course
sacrifice is the center of the community
obviously because Community is a
sacrificial gesture like in so far as
you're not all about what you want right
now you're offering up a sacrifice of
what it is that you want right now to
the Future and the community clearly and
now that's going to integrate you
psychologically it's going to integrate
the society and make it productive and
it's so interesting that we acted that
out for that proposition out for well
the
whole at least in so far as you're
talking about Christian oriented
civilization for the last 2,000 years
without ever really noticing that we
were dramatizing the proposition that
sacrifices at the center of the
community it's like obviously well what
are we to make of you know cities like
San Francisco which I grew up just south
of and it you know by any standard it's
a beautiful city I know people are going
to like roll their some people roll
their eyes I mean you have the bay on
one side you have the ocean on the other
it has magnificent Bridges I mean it's a
it's a testament to what's possible in a
city in terms of diverse Landscapes Etc
but the downtown the center of the city
is just Beyond anybody's sense of of of
De indecency to walk down in the in the
afternoon hours let alone at night so
that at this point you you wonder like
is the center really the center I mean
you you literally have to avoid the
center of the city in order to get away
from any of that and and it's very yeah
the question is so you're you're asking
a symbolic question in some ways like
you're asking what is the nature of the
relationship
between the the state of society in
general and the fact that the centers of
cities have deteriorated well those
aren't unrelated not in the least
they're very tightly related because the
center does not hold right what's the
famous poem from the 1920s the center is
loosened right and mere chaos is around
mere chaos is set upon the world I
haven't got the quote precisely right
that was TS Elliott he knew that when
when the center pillar
disintegrates then everything falls into
chaos that's one of the oldest
realizations of of humankind the
question might be what has caused the
degeneration of this of the center well
man you could think about
that the whole culture war is meditation
on exactly that question you know
there's an insistence on the postmodern
side so the postmodernists they figured
out that we see the world through a
story they were right and and that's a
devastating blow to the empiricists and
the rationalists because they were wrong
we do not build our knowledge in
consequence of an aggregation of facts
that's not how it works and a story is
something like the prioritization of the
world of facts I heard recently that
that religion teaches through story
philosophy teaches through um language
that is divorced of story and that
science is designed to try and remove
itself from language almost entirely I
mean you'd love to just present graphs
and figures but you have to explain
what's in those right there's a
discussion there's some conclusions but
the idea is that as scientists we're
supposed to be objective and just
interpret the data as they stand to not
and to not only be informed by the fact
to not INF a story but but story is the
the the way that the brain works right I
mean beginning middle end um it's also
the thing is the story creeps into
science in in what would you say
unavoidably so here let me give you an
example so I read a book once that was
written by an X KGB agent who talked
about a lab in the in the Soviet Union
where there had was a dreadful accident
at one point that resulted in the death
of about 500 people they
were trying to produce an amalgam of um
Ebola and small pox yikes and then to
aerosolize it oh goodness okay now look
from a strictly scientific
perspective value free there's no
difference between pursuing that branch
of knowledge and pursuing any other now
you say well that's preposterous it's
like yeah yes but it's Preposterous
because we know
that you can have an evil scientist I
mean Jesus that's the Trope of how many
movies is evil scientist a uses evil
scientist as a Trope like the bad guy is
almost always an evil scientist right so
it's not like we don't know this so that
science itself which is the value free
pursuit of facts can be an evil
Enterprise if you're a good scientist
the story is always lurking in the
background like why are you conducting
your investigation well I want to
understand more about the human psyche
well why well I want to be of Aid to the
human Enterprise I want to make things
better that's the story I want to pursue
truth in a manner that makes things
better that's the story part well you
and you might say well that's
self-evidence like it's only
self-evident when it's working properly
when it's not working properly things
get bad quick so there were scientists
in Unit 731 when the Japanese invaded
China and you cannot read about what
they did without without traumatizing
yourself permanently for the rest of
your life right what happened with Unit
731 it's the worst human atrocity I've
ever seen by a lot and that was the
scientific Enterprise gone astray let's
say it has to be encapsulated within a
value structure and the question is well
what's the appropriate value structure
we're starting to figure that out
because you know I talked to Richard
Dawkins about this a little bit one of
the things that disheartens Dawkins is
that as the humanistic Enterprise has
progressed and as the atheistic impulse
has made itself more
manifest The Assault on science and
logic at the universities has
intensified cuz his notion was if we
could just free oursel from the
superstitions of the past everyone would
become like a hybrid between let's say
Newton and bacon and dekart it's like no
it turns out that when you destabilize
the underlying story everybody becomes a
narcissistic immature psychopath and
they don't make good scientists and like
the evidence for that is kind of Stark
because I'm sure you've observed like
I've observed that over the last 20
years the scientific Enterprise has
become a lot less reliable than it was
well for a number of reasons I mean one
of the primary ones in my opinion um and
I'm familiar with the scientific
Community is that that that a lot of
science is built on lineages and you
know who your advisers were and so forth
it relates to funding Etc and it used to
be that the primary value with within
and across lineages was to seek out new
territory I could tell a lot of stories
that would take up hours about great
advisers telling their students to move
into new territories which sounded like
get out of my field I'm going to
demolish you but instead what they were
encouraging them to do was to go on
let's use your language New Adventures
of responsibility New Frontier but
instead what's happened is that 95% of
the scientists in a given subfield all
work on similar problems pin medals on
each other validate each other fund each
other and as a consequence there are a
lot of untouched problems that will
hopefully it somay someday be
investigated the other consequence is
that this debacle within the field of
Alzheimer's in dementia where one
laboratory fudges data and you kind of
wonder if I mean that's not my subfield
but I you step back from there you go
how the hell this progress for 15 years
where everyone was you know like the
emperor has no clothes like everyone
agreeing that this is the stuff to work
on when when in fact the data were
falsified and people knew people knew so
what that means is that it's like it's
like bad family values passed on through
generations and these I do think these
are well-meaning people along the line
but yeah yes and no little a little bit
uh intense on the career formulation
side of things well so right the
careerist aspect as opposed to the
scientist aspect well well that exist
too well let let's think about let's
think about that critically it's like
science is a very weird Endeavor because
in order to actually be a scientist you
have to put discovering that you're
wrong before demonstrating that you're
right and that is hard on your career in
the short term like if you play that
game and you're good at it you can
discover something real but that's going
to take a while and it's not certain
right it's not at all surprising that
people would subvert an Enterprise that
difficult to the narrow demands of
career enhancement it's exactly what
you'd expect unless there was a
stunningly powerful counterveiling force
and that force was powerful enough let's
say
from 1550
to
1980 so that science worked but that's a
short period of time and it's only
happened once and we don't know what
conditions had to be in place for people
to actually like seriously prioritize
the truth seriously because that's what
a serious scientist does and so it's not
surprising that it would degenerate into
something like Dynasty and nepotism
that's exactly what you'd expect that's
the historical Norm so then you might
think well what are the preconditions
that have to be in place as narrative
foundation for there to be at least some
some people that are prioritizing the
truth I think one needs to reward true
adventure and Novelty taking on novel
problems and you know these days it's so
hard for a scientist to birth an entire
New Field and yet there are huge huge
sets of untapped problems the the
challenge for them is it's difficult to
get funding to take on things that are
truly new you know there's a lot of
discussion these days about challenges
with the NIH Etc I think that the
biggest challenge regardless of the size
of the budget which is also you know an
issue that needs to be dealt with and
where where it's spent is that we tend
to reward science that's already
completed that fits with the current
narrative and it's very incremental they
reward incremental science whereas great
science comes through taking great risk
and people like you said holding the
truth Above All Else and being willing
to stake their careers on it and we need
to actually reward failure if it
involved effort to solve things
correctly in other words give give young
scientists funding and encourage them to
go after novel problems and understand
that most of them will fail and
that doesn't necessarily mean that they
have to be exited out of the University
give them a new novel problem to tackle
problem is there's so much pressure and
you know because you're University
Professor I know you know in order to
reach tenure you need to you need to
reduce the entropy as much as possible
in any event I without going down that
path too too far I now um understand why
you're saying that science in has to
invoke story that Mak has to be embedded
that makes sense that makes sense
otherwise well science is the handmaiden
of some story there's no way around that
because motivation is the handmaiden of
some story and so the motivational
framework has to be put in place
accurately and the motivational
framework for scientific inquiry is very
stringent truth above all right so if
you state your whole goddamn career on a
particular hypothesis and you run a
critical study and it turns out that the
reason you're famous is invalid you have
to publish that why the hell would you
do that right and the answer has to be
because you hold the truth in
relationship to human flourishing higher
than the Integrity of your own even your
own self valuation well man that's a
very diff that's a very difficult thing
to
establish now you can do that with young
scientists to some degree because you
can help them understand
that as a medium to long-term game
there's nothing better than pursuit of
the truth and so that's worth a risk
it's worth a risk because you can be
spectacularly successful if you pursue
the truth it's unlikely like it's
unlikely to be a successful entrepreneur
but if you get it right man you like
you've hit the mother load right and you
don't want to falsify your data because
you want to spend your whole life
pursuing something that doesn't exist
because you will talk yourself into
belief that your falsifications are true
and then you'll warp the whole field as
you said you Illustrated that in
relationship to Alzheimer's disease like
you can instill love of the truth in in
your students
but you have to believe that's a story
too you have to believe that the truth
will set you free right and that's a
religious presumption in the final
analysis serve truth it's the best
long-term strategy it's the best
adventure that's a good thing to know
too it's the best adventure so I made a
triumvirate of Truth responsibility and
Adventure saying they're the same thing
and I figured it out with regard to
truth too truth is an
adventure because if
you what would you say vow to follow the
path of the truth you have to let go of
the predictability of the outcome right
now if I wanted to manipulate you in
some way I would craft my strategy for
this podcast a priority and then I would
tilt the podcast toward that end right
and I could be more or less
sophisticated at that or I could just
say we're going to follow the thread
wherever it goes and I'm going to accept
the outcome and I'm going to presume
that the outcome is the best outcome
that could possibly have been even if I
don't see why okay why is that an
adventure because if I let go of my
predetermined goal I don't know what's
going to
happen and that's exciting it's right
cuz don't know well that's the that's
the essence of Adventure it's like
you're bounding over the Uncharted sea
let's say and you don't know what's
going to happen next well why would you
exchange that for like a kind of banel
predictability well to build your career
to I mean I understand why but you're
foregoing what's truly valuable for
something that's second rate for
something that's secure that's what
Abraham did it's like you know it's
better to have the adventure why the
hell wouldn't you want that so he left
what was indulgent he had everything for
what was truly generative in service to
something larger and dangerous and
dangerous like he ends up as a warrior
at one point he has to raise an army to
rescue his nephew from the hands of
tyrants it's like you know all the
adventures of Life get thrown at him but
it turns out that that's what he wants
he wants all the adventures of life to
be thrown at him and that is what
everyone wants and I think that is you
know the idea that when you go watch the
Lord of the Rings for example or The
Hobbit you're
seeing the characterization of human
personality dramatized like obviously
right that's like a truism but you have
to think about what that means it's like
The Hobbit is Abraham it's exactly the
same
story and that story is the story of the
that's the genuine identity of the
individual and the promise is is that if
you aim up and you live in the spirit of
the truth you'll have the Redemptive
adventure of your life and that'll be of
such significance that it'll justify the
suffering that's intrinsic to life and I
think that's right I mean when when you
look at your own life I
mean you're you're on an adventure you
have this podcast it's ridiculously
successful right in a way that I'm sure
you couldn't have imagined how long five
years ago yeah we we are about to hit
the end of four years in a couple weeks
we've been we launched in January 2021
no no premonition could have seen this
or for I had no concept that it would
become what it's become right okay and
so what what's the existential
consequence of that like you know I mean
everyone's life is rif with the
possibility of suffering and now you
have something exciting and generative
to do why is that working I mean
existentially why does that work you
know people will ask me what's next
where are you headed and I would just
say you know like on well on Friday I'm
talking to Jordan Peterson and I'm
focused on that all week long and next
week I'm recording a solo podcast C
about whatever it happens to be I just
believe that's setting my sights on the
proximal and I just believe in um I know
my
my deep deep deep love of finding
organizing and disseminating information
that I hope will be useful to people
okay so that's it that's that's what
that's the driving force behind all of
it really okay so great so so I would
say I don't think that that Proclamation
I don't think is any different any
different from the notion of identity
with the Redeeming Word that's the same
idea cuz you said generated generating
ideas right information and
disseminating it right so that's like
it's valid inquiry and and dissemination
of the consequences okay your claim is
that that's highly intrinsically
motivating oh yeah right okay so then I
Delight I Delight in it I it's hard
sometimes I mean it's I was trying to
read a really difficult paper yesterday
it's hard but it it feels so good okay
so then we might say well what's what
what's the basis for that intrinsic
pleasure we think about that
biologically well you could imagine it
as a manifestation of
the Instinct that
integrates right it integrates you
across time it integrates you with other
people across time right and there's a
marker for that why wouldn't you find
your how could it be otherwise then you
would find your deepest
satisfaction in pursuing the course of
action that integrates you
psychologically and integrates other
people socially like that would assume
that there's a concordance between your
deepest self-interest and the interest
of your society and it better be that
way because otherwise you couldn't
Thrive as an individual in society so it
better be that way and we've been doing
this for a very long time as human
beings so why we wouldn't have an
instinct to mark that pathway and of
course we'd find our deepest
satisfaction in that I mean once you
once you see these issues through that
light they become I think painfully
obvious so because that also because the
contrary hypothesis is absurd it's like
you're going to find deep satisfaction
what rejecting knowledge and if you do
happen to stumble across a nugget you're
going to hoard it for yourself right
well right right exactly it's laughable
it's clearly laughable No One Believes
that earlier we were talking about
operationalizing um this uh the effort
the calling to move from potential chaos
to order starts with organizing one's
physical space if we were to you know
extend the um the the rings of the
bullseye out a little bit further for
people listening who are trying to
figure out like what where where do they
receive that calling how how do they
find their calling that like where so
responsibility and Adventure being
perhaps the um the the compass through
which we can you know like navigate
there so they think like well where can
they
um grab a hold of their responsibility
and and then as a consequence of doing
that engage in adventure and have an
impact that is good for them and good
for the world that that's how do how do
they find that I think there's ve
there's very practical answers to those
questions so two of the
most two of the highest order
characterizations of the Divine in the
biblical library is calling and
conscience and you could think about
those you could think about those as
integrated manifestations of positive
and negative emotion so imagine there's
a pathway forward to your aim okay your
negative emotion tells you when you
deviate from the pathway and your
positive emotion tells you when you're
progressing along the pathway okay now
imagine that there's a voice of your
integrated positive emotion and there's
a voice of your integrated negative
emotion calling that's what fills you
with enthusias iasm and that root word
of that is Theos right deos that's God
calling conscience okay so now that
beckons you forward so how do you find
that some things bother
you those are your problems and you
might think I don't want to have any
problems it's like no you've got some
problems you can tell that cuz those
things bug you that's your conscience
calling you to your destiny those
problems okay calling there's some
things that interest you right and you
don't get to pick them exactly they just
sort of make themselves manifest like
the burning bush did to Moses cuz that's
an example that's the symbolic
representation of calling it's the
dynamism between calling and conscience
that orients people upwards right that's
the pillar of flame and the pillar of
Darkness that guides the Israelites
across the desert when they're lost
calling beckons conscience provides
disciplinary limitations that's a good
way of thinking about it so you can see
that some things are good you ask
yourself what bothers me about
me okay now you have a domain you think
well man some of those things I just I
don't know how to fix them fine don't
fix them fix some of the things you
could fix that's that we talked about
that or make your goddamn bed in the
morning like you could do that and it's
like you see people their lives are so
chaotic like they're their living
environment every single bit of it is a
catastrophic mess some sometimes
multiple Generations deep it's just
chaos everywhere it's like where do you
start dealing with chaos wherever you
can put something in order by your own
standards of order and then see what
happens because what'll happen is now
you got a
little like little corner of order and
now you're a little more well situated
and then you'll be able to see what the
next what's the next step and you might
think well it looks hopeless because
there's just chaos everywhere it's like
it's okay hey because the process is
exponential so even if you start
nowhere if you keep doubling you're
going to get somewhere and faster than
you think and well the same thing
applies when you're plummeting into the
abyss un degenerative stuff a colleague
of mine who he's geneticist said you
know it takes many many many generations
to evolve a species it doesn't take very
many to devolve a species mut negative
mutations can build on another and crash
a species very very fast
I think our psyche is is similar in that
way well that's an anthropic problem
there's way more ways to make something
complex worse than there are to make it
better right that's why it's a straight
and narrow path my father came to this
country from Argentina and he grew up in
a lot of uh surrounded by a lot of
political chaos came to the country
became a physicist probably because he
likes order he's a very orderly Guy and
um it was probably in the early 90s that
we went I was born in 75 so probably
yeah early 90s that we went to a movie
theater uh together to see a movie and
he said it as we were walking in he said
look and I said what and he said this is
the beginning of the end and I said what
do you mean he said we're degenerating
as a society and I said why and he said
there are people here in their pajamas
right right and obviously they weren't
in their pajamas but they come in in
kind of like bath you know bathroom
slippers and they like they weren't
slovenly but they weren't taking care of
themselves clearly worse worse care what
other people thought right that's right
they were making a public display of
their lack of care right exactly EXA
that's a narcissistic aspect to that too
yeah yeah he's right about that and I
thought at the time like he's being
judgmental I was a teen right he's being
judgmental Etc and um but you know I
would say from 1990 until fairly
recently hopefully things are shifting
for the better now but um there has
seemed to be it's kind of chaos out
there now I think it's wonderful that
people can express themselves by wearing
clothes that they feel represent them
Etc but this wasn't that this was a lack
of care look voluntary the what would
you say the evocation of voluntary chaos
that's one thing the degeneration into
chaos through sloth let's say that's not
an adventure that's carelessness in all
things masquerading as an adventure I'm
so cool I don't care it's like you're
not cool you're just useless and you're
covering your uselessness with a veneer
of revolutionary morality it's like
there's nothing in that that's up like
if people want to deviate in the manner
they present themselves in dress and
they're doing that because they have a
inspiration or a purpose then that's
completely different than just being so
cool you don't care and that's not cool
there's nothing about that that's cool
and you know you might say and you had
this sense when you were a kid that your
dad was overreacting it's like yeah
well if you look you can see things
before other people see them and he and
he came from a place that had gone
through a fair number of very rough
times and so he could have been
perfectly accurate in what he
saw highly likely that's another example
of the center
disintegrating right where do you think
we are now in uh in the United States I
think right in terms of how we represent
hold and represent order versus chaos I
mean we were talking about some of the
you know this uh these social media
posts recently we just had a a public
public display of an assassination maybe
you know I hadn't intended on going
there but I think it's worth talking
about um it was weird I got pulled into
this through tangential reasons this
Luigi manion's last tweet was a podcast
cover of of my episode with Jonathan
height um and some media Outlets tried
to make something of that you know but
clearly he
was very smart
clearly he had for thought to his
actions he 3D printed this gun gun it
seems is all alleged now but it seems to
be pointing that direction he seems to
not want the police to go investigate
anybody else you know because he claims
there's no one else acting with him Etc
he um clearly was trying to make a
statement but the statement was was a
combination of statements about the the
um Insurance system um sort of
anti-establishment because of his
affinity for uh kazinski unibomber
bombings but at the same time he uh he
didn't really seem to fall into kind of
left leaning or right leaning politics
squarely he was kind of all over the
place so you're you're a trained
clinician you think there's some
schizotypal or schizophrenic type
organization there in his head or lack
of organization I mean what are we to
make of this and we and we had to see
somebody assassinated shot in the back
multi guess I would say the first thing
I would be looking for is pathological
narcissism I
disordered
thought possibly but he was quite
successful academically like the typical
pattern for something like schizophrenic
dis dissolution is very very much
difficulty in maintaining so discipline
striving in a highly intellectual
atmosphere for examp he a valedictorian
he went to school graduated i' think
more luciferian
grandiosity and the intellect is
particularly prone to that you know the
the the the archetypal representation of
the intellect that overreaches is
Lucifer right God's God's highest Angel
gone most catastrophically wrong which
means that the best thing in its place
is the worst thing on the top that
happens with sexuality it can happen
with aggression it certainly happens
with the intellect and so I think he's a
worshipper of his own intellect and
believed that he was the guy who could
make the decision even of life and death
which means he took onto himself the
role of ultimate judge and that's what
the kid who shot up Coline did too and
said in his own writings he's the judge
and that's like narcissistic Beyond
Comprehension and the fact that he's
being celebrated well that's an echo of
that moralizing narcissism that's deeply
embedded in our culture deeply embedded
and so yeah it's a very ugly it's very
ugly I see so we're going to what we're
now
vigilantes in relationship to the
corporate World judge jury and
executioner and the reason we've taken
on that rule is because we unlike let's
say the people who run healthc care
Enterprises we truly care for the sick
and oppressed it's like do you know do
you know yeah there's so much moralizing
in our culture it's beyond it's really
beyond belief I was going to say all
these CEOs now are going to need
personal security that's hardly going to
you know cause them to adjust their you
know premiums or something downward I
mean I think as people get more scared
they tend to uh you know up double yeah
they tend to double down I mean earlier
we were talking about action at a
distance I mean clearly um this Manion
guy has is aware High status so ignored
or notorious there's a hard choice for
young men they'll pick notorious many of
them will and no wonder
because status is everything it's hard
to do good things over long periods time
right it's not hard to be good it's just
hard to do big it's hard to do good
things it's hard to do big things I mean
I think that's one reason why I'm very
happy that Elon is being celebrated you
don't have to agree with him politically
but the Rockets going the idea of going
to Mars trying to U make sure that our
our species replaces itself I mean these
are Big important Endeavors I mean I the
reason well and he can clearly do them I
mean he's he's been insanely successful
doing five possible things
simultaneously right that's not fluke no
right
once probably not fluke even once but
you know the probability that it's fluke
once is higher five times no that's
that's a
reputation right and so he's a he's a
from first principal sort of guy so yeah
I wouldn't bet against Elon Musk so and
that is independent of his political
stance
and is it ult to do good
things well it's hard it's hard it's
hard it's hard to do long-term good
things because they're longterm that's
what I was trying to say right but it's
also intensely the thing is it's also
this is that back to that issue of the
relationship between responsibility and
Adventure it's like if the aim is true
the voyage is
worthwhile and so and that happens right
away like you know you're very
successful with your podcast but my
suspicion are you've deeply enjoyed it
since its onset well so so well that
means that some of your pleasure is
satiation related you've become
successful but if that was your aim you
would have failed as a podcaster because
definely podast I definitely would have
failed oh definitely oh absolutely 100%
because it wasn't the pursuit of
pleasure per se it's sort of like the
difference between you know is it easier
to be the class clown or um the top of
the class it's just much easier to be
the class clown all you have to do is
crack 10 jokes one of them hits you know
and you're you're safe but you're you're
actually dissolving as you go right
right right well that's the
prioritization of the short term over
the long run I mean Rogan's a perfectly
appropriate example because he's sort of
like the archetype of the successful
podcaster it's like what's Joe doing
well he's doing what he's always done he
sits down with his producer one guy and
he talks to people he wants to talk to
about things he wants to talk to them
about that's the whole thing the whole
and it's you know the left the lefties
who refused to talk to people in the
podcast world for 10 years are now
proclaiming to everyone who listen that
they should have built their own you
know alternative media apparatus and
they could have participated in the one
that exists now at any time had they
shown the least proclivity to do
so how it's not such an easy thing to
build because it wasn't something that
Joe built it was something that happened
around him in consequence of the nature
of his Pursuit and that's the case for
virtually all the successful podcasters
I think people forget how Joe's podcast
started do you you might know this story
I'll keep it brief but um he was a
comedian at The Comedy Store he had done
some television and things of that sort
but um and people can find this online
the videos are on YouTube where a
comedian was stealing Ari shaffir's
jokes so Joe got up on stage and said
there's a there's a um there's some
ethics in the comedy community people
can buy jokes but you you don't steal
jokes apparently and there's an
etiquette as well so apparently he
confronted this guy in front of the
audience and said you're stealing his
jokes and the guy challenged him and Joe
said no like Joe was stood up in the
name of justice for a friend of his and
my understanding could be wrong about
this but my understanding is that Joe
was then banished from that particular
particular Comedy Club so what did he do
he went home he popped open his laptop
and he and Brian Redban and a few other
folks started what eventually became the
Joe Rogan podcast it came out of a um an
Impulse to stand up for the
truth which I think is an important
thing for people to understand because
it helps you understand Joe um need be
uning in that yeah yeah and and I think
yeah and you know he doesn't claim to
always be right but his um his pursuit
of the truth has um been a driving force
for the podcast he claims consistently
to not be sufficiently right that's why
he listens and asks questions you don't
ask genuine questions if you believe
that you already know everything you
only ask real questions if you don't
think that you know enough and Joe
wouldn't be perennially attractive to
his audiences if he wasn't asking the
same questions that the audience would
like to have answered right he's
genuinely curious absolutely well musk
himself said you know when when I
interviewed him he talked about a
terrible existential crisis that he had
when he was 13 14 which is not atypical
of you know out people with outstanding
intellects let's say um and he resolved
that by recognizing that the quest is
the source of meaning and so he took it
upon himself self to confront difficult
problems and try to solve them and he
found that to be sufficiently gratifying
so his existential crisis resolved
itself and that's very much the same
pattern that Rogan is exemplifying and
you in your Pursuits and you can see
what impact it has on the public you
know and we were I was talking with one
of your staff members before this
podcast about your lectures say in
Australia and so you're in the weird
position where 5,000 people come and
listen to a biologist lecture
spontaneously for what 90 minutes like
what the hell well that's just an
indication of how compelled people are
by anything approximating a genuine
Quest it doesn't even matter the
direction right it matters the
commitment and that capacity to explore
and transmit and that is a manifestation
of the word that
redeems I love this idea or what you
just said that it doesn't even so M so
much matter the direction as much as the
commitment a colleague of mine at
Stanford who I um respect tremendously
Anna lmy who wrote the book dopamine
Nation she's the head of our dual
diagnosis Addiction Center she was the
one who really truly deserves credit for
bringing dopamine into the public
discussion over the last few years she
initiated that talking about how big
inflections in dopamine that are very
fast that aren't preceded by effort AKA
drugs of abuse behavioral addictions Etc
leave us below Baseline with our
dopamine and then people will engage in
more of the behavior it drives us
further and further and further that's
kind of the the principle of it um I was
talking to her about how people get
sober and the conversation turned to how
do young people find their purpose it
was it was very interesting she said
let's talk about finding purpose
everyone nowadays wants to know what
their purpose is and she said the way
you find your purpose is by going out on
your front lawn and seeing if the leaves
need to be raped sounds familiar right
you find purpose by um figuring out how
you can be of use at progressively
larger and larger spheres away from
yourself and in doing that and the
present and in doing that you start to
hear the calling and you find your
purpose and it as you said or it reveals
itself to you the same thing right yeah
so I think you two would be enjoy a
conversation at some point important
thing to return to because people are
often curious about what to do
practically it's like okay first this is
what Jacob does Jacob in Old Testament
stories he eventually becomes Israel
right and so that's his name and Israel
means we who wrestle with God now Jacob
is a bad guy when the story starts and
he leaves his home and the perverse
influence of his mother and his criminal
betraying past behind and he decides
that he's going to aim up and that night
he makes an altar and he makes a
sacrifice and that night he has a dream
of a staircase that reaches up to heaven
which is now what he's walking up right
and
so he finds his his
purpose he finds his Adventure as a
consequence of his decision to be better
okay so now you want to find your
purpose okay first thing you have to
do you have to review how wretched and
miserable you actually are and you have
to face that and then you have to think
I'd rather not have that and it has to
be true and then you have to aim up now
you don't know what that means because
like you're pretty scattered and
dissolute but at least you got the damn
intent in mind and then you have to be
willing to make the
sacrifices right along the way okay then
what happens well then the pathway will
reveal itself to you in increments
calling is there something around here
that I could fix that I would fix that's
a great question is there something hand
that I could fix that I would fix it
might be something low cuz especially
when you first get going you're not good
for anything so you might have to start
with something pretty trivial but it
doesn't matter because you start getting
better is there something that bothers
me that's conscience that I could set
right in some small way well that's
there for everyone right in the midst of
the most catastrophic mess that pathway
you might even say look The More Mess
Around you the more unstructured
possibility you have it had
and it's true you know it's like I'm not
trying to be a poly an Ana about this I
know how difficult that is but it is the
case that the more mess at hand that you
can see the more opportunity that's
there CU well if you can see that it's a
mess then you can see the pathway to to
cleaning it up well so do it do it see
what happens that's the adventure what's
going to happen in my class I my maps of
meeting class I used to have students do
this as a project and one of the
projects was find something around you
in your neighborhood wherever in your
family that isn't set right and see if
you could set it right just write down
what happens well one student in
particular he decided his mother had
died and the family kind of fragmented
and so he decided he would take try to
take on the role of mother you know be
responsible for the household operating
well grew him up like mad as you can
imagine he ran into all sorts of weird
resistances right cuz his family was
upset that he was doing what mom used to
do and like he just had a tremendously
complex Adventure as a consequence of
his willingness to pursue this was
obviously necessary because the
alternative was that his family was
going to fall apart it's like that's
there for everyone you say well my
circumstances are so difficult it's like
fair enough so are everybody else's by
the way but that means there's a lot of
man yes I fix it a bit and that's
ridiculously entertaining and
unpredictable and that in itself is a
great deal you have no idea what's going
to happen just like you didn't know what
happened when you started the podcast
why' you start it I had it for me I felt
a compulsion um to share what I knew but
because during the pandemic everyone was
so focused on vaccines and lockdowns
that no one was talking about the
reality that everyone was facing
including sorry Josh Gordon I know him
through time um our director of the
National Institute sub mental health not
a single thing out there about hey folks
if you're going to be indoors this much
get some sunlight in your eyes in the
morning or else you're going to have
trouble sleeping trouble sleeping
equates to mental health issues stress
uncertainty my lab was working on ways
to regulate stress through deliberate
breathing through other mechanisms it
was like well I want people to have
tools zero cost tools to deal with their
stress us to help them regulate their
circadian biology because those Wick out
to countering the negative forces that
were on us which are social order was
disrupted people are at home so it was a
desire to give people tools that I knew
existed that I was knowledgeable about
and I had a a longstanding kind of and
growing compulsion that I wanted to talk
about Neuroscience because it's so darn
cool right okay so it's a logical there
there was a lot of energy behind the the
the mission but then there was a calling
the calling was from hearing about
people suffering it's like well of
course you're not sleeping well I mean
not only are there a million things to
worry about right now people aren't
working Etc but you're not getting
sunlight in your eyes you need to get
outside you need to you know and then
there's the whole socialization thing
and look whatever people's circumstances
there are things that they could do and
so I felt that calling and my conscience
told me that I have the knowledge so why
would why would I Cloister it cloer with
it at home that's like what good is that
so I just started blabbing on the
internet right right that's
yeah well that's a that's a perfectly
you know you can think well that's a
logical extension of your subsidiary
calling to be a teacher and a professor
you're already a researcher you're
already a professor so you're
investigating and transmitting knowledge
it's like well looks like you could do
that on a broader scale and the
technolog is there why not explore that
that's a perfectly reasonable and you
can see the interplay of calling and
conscience there that's a lovely way of
characterizing the voice of the Divine
which is is how it's characterized
repeated Elijah Elijah is the prophet
who is appears with Christ when he's
transfigured on the mount in the New
Testament it's Elijah and Moses Elijah
is the first person in human history who
identifies the Divine with conscience
that's his contribution that's a major
psychological Revolution right it's an
unheralded transformation in
understanding it's like it's not the
storm it's not the forest fire it's not
the earthquake it's not the god of
nature nature he's the originator of the
phrase the still Small Voice right like
that's a that the notion that you're
conscience is the voice of the Divine my
God there's there's there's virtually no
dis no Discovery there's no proposition
more revolutionary than that and so
that's why Elijah is a prophet of you
know primary status and I just see no
reason at all not to take that claim
seriously it's like you come up with an
explanation for your conscience it tells
you things you don't want to hear so how
is that you I I mean you have to
gerrymander the definition of you for
that to be you no I absolutely believe
that things come from outside of us
certainly for me and I you know I I'm
now very much a devotee of prayer I pray
before this podcast what do you pray
well before this podcast I prayed for um
Clarity of mind to be able to um to
learn from you and to help transmit that
knowledge to people in a way that would
be useful to them yeah to um for
sustained Focus for um for the ability
to also let go and and not try and
control or or lead with questions and to
um and to allow the the
um a sense of of Randomness and
Serendipity to to make it what it what
it is in trusting that it's in service
to the the listeners right well that's a
very that's a very precise and properly
formulated prayer yeah I pray before
every podcast I pray before going to
sleep Beach and I've been doing this for
about um for a little over a year I
always quietly SEC secret why why did
you decide to do that my coming to the
whole notion of prayer and God Etc um
was complicated in the backdrop in the
sense that I always secretly prayed um
always secretly secretly prayed and then
about a year about a year and a half ago
a guy that works on my security team um
started talking to me about the Bible we
started talking about God and it made
sense I started reading the Bible I'm
not through it yet um and I started
praying and I had a number of
experiences as a consequence of praying
clearly as a consequence of of
prayer that made me realize that prayer
doesn't give me a capacity of any sort
it just allows certain things that I
believe are inside of me to to uh to
come out and for proper prayer
establishes aim yeah that's right oh
yeah well why wouldn't you establish
your aim like why wouldn't you take a
moment before you start your podcast to
remember what the hell you're trying to
accomplish and to have it firmly in mind
yeah and and it felt different so I
should say that you know I I have this
little list that I sometimes do I'll say
you know uh deliberate breathing AK
breath work can allow you to shift your
state hypnosis is a tool that can allow
you to solve a particular problem
because it has some you know aspect of
neuroplasticity we there um non-sleep
deep rest which is a thing that was you
know built out of this this practice
called yoga nedro where you go into a an
awake but deeply relaxed state allows
you to restore your Vigor meditation to
me is a way of of enhancing one's
ability to focus you know a thirde eyye
meditation of concentrating your breath
Etc I mean we know based on the data
improves Focus prayer to me is entirely
different than all of those there's some
overlap that they they they look similar
some of them look similar from the
outside prayer is the the
for me is the allowing of something from
TR truly outside me to come through me
and bring out the best it in me and
that's why I pray for four things I pray
for Ability I pray for other people and
I also have learned that a powerful
aspect of prayer is just listening
because just stopping and listening and
trying to um invite in or allow in
messages that um if I didn't steal
myself that I wouldn't here and
sometimes I'll go to sleep and then the
next morning something will will come to
mind it's not always immediate well I
don't think there's any real difference
between that and Revelation so imagine
that
um what speaks to you in intuition is
the voice of your
aim now this this would
be this would be true if your thoughts
and the images that appear to you are
tools so to speak to orient you towards
your destination
well obviously they have to be that
because if your thoughts and your
Visions let's say didn't Orient you
towards your destination they would be
useless and you'd never get anywhere
okay so now you specify your aim and it
is the voice of that aim that will make
itself manifest to you that is what a
revelation is and one of these days when
we have a podcast I'd like to sit down
and talk to you about the relationship
the formal relationship between thought
and prayer because I think thought is
secularized prayer I'm I I we looked at
it histo because like when did we start
to think that's not so obvious you know
I mean we started to think in words
after we developed the ability to use
language what's that 1 15,000 years
maybe it's longer than that no one
really knows but thought has its
historical Origins the probability that
it emerged from something like prayer as
far as I can tell is 100% but I'd like
to at some point it's complicated but
I'd like to have a discussion with you
about that so imagine that to have an in
to have an informative
intuition means that you posit a
question like and that's a form of
humility it's like there's something I
need to know that I don't know that I
could know that I'd like to know it's
like so you set the stage well once you
set the stage the probability that a
creative idea will enter the theater of
your imagination is much enhanced that's
the first stage of Revelation then you
have to assess that that's
discriminating the spirits you might say
you're separating the wheat from the
chaff that's critical thinking but all
of that as far as I can tell is
something approximating secularized
prayer set your
aim then observe the manifestation of
that aim that it's not it's not even
magical it's how your perception works
now there's a magic to it
because I suppose the magic is that you
can think up something you never thought
up before how the hell do you do that
it's more like you experience it right
you set your aim you have a question so
you're on your knees hoping for an
answer the light bulb goes on well if
that's not Revelation then what the hell
is it it's the same
thing having spent a good portion of my
career digging around in brains
recording from neurons slicing up brains
staining brains and from my
understanding of what of neuros science
and I think by now in 2020 almost 2025
we have a fairly good understanding of
what different brain areas do how
different circuits interact um I don't
see how anyone who's really
interested in how humans work can um not
believe in God and I'm not being
disparaging of people that don't I know
people that are atheists I have some in
my family um and I just don't think that
the human brain and mind is capable of
understanding and managing itself as
well as it possibly could in the absence
of a concept of God in prayer and I
think there's a lot of uh historical
evidence to support that statement
meaning that this notion of God has been
around a very long time this is not a
coincidence I mean humans have discarded
many of the things that you know other
people perhaps came up with this has
been a a stable feature
of Being Human for a very long time of
societies for a very long time and I've
been wanting to ask you um throughout
today's conversation to what extent do
you think the different religions and
the way that they represent God
differently or in the case of
Christianity God and Jesus
Christ to what extent do you think that
the stories and the lessons and the
teachings overlap at the level that
we're talking about today which is
really about a psychological and
neuroscientific level seems to me that
they all Converge on the same themes but
I'm not you know I'm somewhat of a
newbie to all to to formal prayer and
and to reading the Bible and so on so I
like to say you know I have I haven't
gotten my jersey yet because I don't
deserve it but I'm I'm putting in I'm
showing up to practice you know this
kind of thing so I'm just curious to
what extent you see consistent themes
across religions and maybe even to
atheism too like atheism it's been
argued as its own form of religion
perhaps right and for anyone listening I
mean I want to make clear like
the there's I don't have any push back
on atheism it's just that for me
adopting uh really coming to terms with
a a real belief in God and adopting a
prayer practice every single night and
also during the day many times and
always before a podcast has been just
tremendously beneficial to my life so
that's why I'm going to continue to do
it um why I wouldn't I but that's the
question to what extent do different the
way that different religions represent
God you think across religions Converge
on common themes well I think they
converge substantively I mean I think
the best I talked to Camille pelia about
this a few years ago maybe she's she's
one of the world's foremost literary
theorists and she said something very
interesting to me that was quite
surprising she said that had the academy
turned to Eric nyman who is yung's
greatest student by the way instead of
Fuko the whole history of of the
university and the intellectual
Enterprise over the last five decades
would have been entirely different what
happened with Fuko well Fuko is the most
cited cited scholar who ever
lived and Fuko believes that the story
that we act out is one of power and
that's wrong it and it's not just wrong
it's like perversely and dangerously
wrong I think it's technically wrong
wrong as well as being ethically wrong
partly because power does not provide a
stable basis for psychological
integration or social Unity it's just
it's not it power might be more
effective adaptively than capitulation
and
dependence but it's not an optimized
solution not by any stretch of the
imagination and I think the
data demonstrating that I think it's
and I outlin that in in in this book we
who wrestle with
God Eric neyman Carl Yung Mach eliat a
host of others outlined the patterns of
religious thinking and it took the most
of the 20th century to do that and they
found recurring themes that are profound
so what one example the ancient
Egyptians worshiped a god Horus everyone
knows the god Horus because the his
emblem is the ie the Open Eye well what
does that mean it means in part that the
ancient Egyptians worshiped
attention and they felt that the god of
attention was the antidote to the
pathological
State and they were right about that I
mean they had a god of the pathological
state that was Seth the god Seth the
name Seth became Satan through the
Coptic through the Coptic Christian
so they believed that the degenerate
state had a spirit and the antidote to
the spirit of the degenerate state was
the
allseeing the allseeing upward striving
eye and that's right it's like they
nailed that sounds like what you were
saying before where you set your sights
where you set high and to the to the
heavens and then to the most proximal
thing that's going to deliver you to the
next rung well and there's a difference
between attention and thinking like
attention is a quest if you're paying
attention you're looking you're seeking
you're knocking you're asking right and
the Eternal promise is that if you ask
you'll be answered and if you seek
you'll find and it's the the ey is the
gateway to that and it's the antidote to
the degenerate State because the
degenerate State the totalitarian state
insists and tyrannizes and the open eye
seeks well the Egyptians figured this
out and they the Egyptian theology had a
walloping impact on Jewish theology I
mean the Jews came out of Egypt like
there are concept that's that's a
conceptu there are consequences of that
conceptually as well as historically the
the her the pattern of the hero's
journey that's replicated I would say
that's the central pattern of story per
se and that makes itself manifest in
perhaps all cultures that have managed
any unity and any progress
whatsoever is there a hierarchy of
religious
truth yes in just as there's a hierarchy
in literary depth we understand that a a
dimore romance is not as profound as a
dovi novel we know there's a hierarchy
of depth and you can arrange
religious apprehension in terms of a
hierarchy of quality and I think the
Union school did that brilliantly
brilliantly and biologists should know
it in Far More depth the best
neuroscientists of emotion and
motivation that I knew and that include
Yak PP they knew the the the work of
ilad for example would you which of
those readings would you recommend for
somebody who's interested in Psychology
and Neuroscience explained at that level
I would start with the sacred and the
profane by by ilad and also
um Eric neyman's book uh the Origins and
history of Consciousness that's a harder
one because it's unless you know the
lingo of that school it's hard to it's
hard to understand what he's aiming at
if you understand that he's aiming at
he's
he's elaborating on the symbolism of The
Adventurous Spirit that's a good way of
thinking about it it's a technical
analysis of the structure of heroic
expansion of personality but it it's an
easier way in is through ilot
sacred and the profane short book you
could you would read it now knowing that
the gods that ilad describe as Waring in
the Pagan world are in part
manifestations of the personality of
motivational drive and the mapping of
that war across times that's the war of
the Gods in heaven which is a very
common mythological Trope there's a war
that integrates towards a monotheism and
ilot to trct that in multiple cultures
and that's very it's very much worth
knowing because it explains it explains
the symbolism of the emergence of the
integrated literate human psyche across
tens of thousands of years that's
captured in story so imagine this here's
a way of thinking about it so tribe A
Tribe B tribe C now they all have their
highest deity or their panoply of
deities now they unite okay so as they
unite they fight they compete and they
cooperate they kill each other they
cooperate and trade at the same time
that's happening there's a war in the
space of ideas between their respective
deities and you could think about the
human beings acting out that war just as
you could think about the war the
abstraction reflecting the conflict on
Earth well there's a pattern to that
conflict that pattern is quite stable
across cultures it tilts towards a
monotheistic unity in so far as the
multiplicity of cultures unifies well
obviously like what are they going to
unify with in the absence of conceptual
Unity I don't think so and why wouldn't
it be that the movement towards that
conceptual Unity which is the
establishment of a larger scale
civilization would involve the battle
between ideas of the Divine and their
integration into something resembling a
Unity like clearly well that's part of
the Proclamation let's say of the
analytic psychologists that were all
part of Carl school and the academy just
ignored that entirely except for Camille
Pia who understands this quite
profoundly and went in the direction of
Fuko these are these lineages that we
were talking about before it's it's hard
for people to appreciate just how
powerful these academic lineages are and
scientific lineages are because they
they set trajectories I've been yeah and
they Define what's forbidden like all my
all the people that advised me as a
graduate student even those who had my
best interest firmly in mind told me to
never talk about my interest in Union
psychology really yeah sorry I'm
laughing cuz it's so Preposterous yeah
well I and and like it it it's not
surprising I mean I always did when I
went for job interviews and that
definitely was part of what scuttled at
me at some of the places I interviewed
now fortunately they hired me at Harvard
and
so I was what I was discussing was
verboten in many places but not there so
you know that worked out quite nicely
for I was going to say clearly it worked
out I've been I've been meaning to ask
you I've been reading a a really
interesting book um recently that's uh
Bas basically grounded in adarian
Psychology yeah I'm I wasn't familiar
with adarian psychology yeah Adler's
very practical the book talks about
Adler as a as a Counterpoint to Freud
and Yung what's the book um the book is
called the courage to be disliked and I
highly recommend it to everybody it was
actually written by Japanese author I
think there are two Japanese authors it
didn't get quite so popular in this
country but it it had a big following um
in Japan and I think in other places in
uh in Asia and um the book is is set up
as a conversation between essentially a
philosopher at of adarian psychology and
a student um who's challenging him so
it's a conversation that raises all the
all the challenges that one that would
come to one's mind if you were to be
presented with this idea of Life tasks
and that we're supposed to discard with
our thoughts about prior trauma and just
figure out what are our tasks now right
right and I I like the practicality of
it Adler's very practical yeah I like
that was just curious what your thoughts
were about that the it seems to fit
quite well with your your Notions and
what you've talked about in multiple
books including the most recent one um
the one that's out now about getting
really serious about what your tasks are
at this moment in time and embracing
those tasks as a way to progress forward
as opposed to um floundering in Notions
about the the past and I think it it
might it might hit some people Square
upside the head when when there's I
think one of the chapters opens with the
words there's no such thing as trauma
which is clearly not true but the whole
idea is to to prompt a different way of
thinking and to let people start to
drill into like okay what do I need to
do now regardless of what my parents did
or didn't do right regardless of my
damaged self and I I must say I really
like the book well I would say I should
say I I really like I should say I
really like the concept embracing task
while agonizing over the meaning of life
and what one is to do yes well Adler was
the most practical of the small crowd
that aggregated around Freud and so
yung's take was that Freud focused on
sex and Adler focused on Power and Yung
focused on what transcended both and I
think that's right now Adler is a good
repost to Freud in exactly the way you
described if you like that book and
you're interested in all three of them
let's say there's a great book called
discovery of the unconscious which was
written by a man named hre elenberger
who was the foremost exponent of
existential psychology in the 1950s
brilliant brilliant scholar and it is
the best analysis of Freud Jung and
Adler that's ever been written by a lot
and it's it's a truly great book he also
traces the idea of the unconscious back
350 years before Freud so it's a
masterful study but I liked Adler and he
was much less charismatic than Freud and
Yung and so his star didn't shine as
brightly but he's very practically
oriented and much of his thinking would
what would you say fits quite nicely
with a bottom with the same kind of
bottom up approach that a more
behaviorally oriented psychotherapist
would employ so look it's it's it's
there are some
people if you're if you're engaging in a
therapeutic process with someone there
are people who are best engaged with at
the level of concept those are people
are high in trait
openness not everyone's like that in
fact most people aren't like that yungi
and psychology works really well on
highly creative people and almost all
yung's clients were creative because
they wouldn't have come to him otherwise
and there's also people for whom sexual
dysfunction and Trauma are the
primary what would you say say the the
primary preoccupation of their life and
the past and Freud serves them well
Adler is very practical and if you're
looking for a psychologist to help
you figure out how you could advance
from where you are now he's he's he's
got plenty of things to say that are
good he also wasn't as good a literary
stylist as young Yung or Freud so that
also put him off to the side to some
degree but anyways a deep deeper
investigations can certainly be found in
discovery of the unconscious and if for
anybody listening and watching who's
interested in psychological ideas
broadly and would like familiarity with
the psychoanalytic tradition Freud Jung
and Adler let's say primary there is not
a better book than discovery of the
unconscious it's really a work of Genius
you know what's missing from the
literature thank you for those by the
way is a really excellent up-to-date
book on neuroscience and the mind and
psychology perhaps we write one together
yeah yeah well that's that's me it's
just not out there I mean there
textbooks on Neuroscience there's some
there's a lot of discussion as you know
about Free Will lack of Free Will
depending on which author you're paying
attention to but um there isn't really a
satisfactory book about the brain the
mind and psychology this just doesn't
exist yeah the closest one I ever
encountered probably is affective
Neuroscience panp book he's uh I'm So I
must say um you've mentioned pup a few
times and and Yak Pang
uh as some of you may know but perhaps
most of you don't is was such a gift to
science and the fact that I think the
first time I heard you lecture in one of
your YouTube lectures you mentioned Yak
Pang up and I thought okay like this guy
knows knows the good stuff because he
was the first one to talk about juvenile
play as a way of exploring circuitry and
social dynamics such such and that fit
by the way that fit perfectly with PJ's
observations of childhood socialization
it's like I I came across panks up and I
thought oh that's so cool now we have
the psychophysiological basis for pan
developmental theory was perfect yeah so
that was that was lovely concordance YP
would have been uh far more recognized
had he bit he was at Bowling Green
University I think and so smaller
University perhaps I don't know I didn't
ever hear a lecture maybe not as
charismatic as some of the other
luminaries of of neuroscience at that
time but yeah I don't know how he was as
a lecturer he's a great writer and man
he had an uniring eye for the right
problems in in terms of psychological
investigation and very brave in that
regard I mean he studied laughter in
rats and you think oh of all the absurd
things to focus on it's like no you just
don't understand where the goal is or
play among rats who cares that rats play
well like that would be the sort of
research proposal that would be pillared
by sensible Republicans looking to trim
government waste it's like no that was
the heart of the matter right rats
organized their social hierarchy through
play not through Force right that's a
big Discovery like that's I think he
should have won a Nobel Prize you too
yeah he he should have won a nail for a
variety of his discoveries but that one
in particular like rats have an implicit
morality that's a that's a major league
disc and it's based on play WoW stunning
and we see the same thing in kids
obviously and then well we see the same
thing in chimpanzees like it's pretty
strange to understand that dominance
hierarchies if they're functional are
often organized in consequence of play
not force like so much for uh
Fuko when you look on out on the
landscape of social media um do you see
elements of that as well that there's
sort of a playfulness among uh people
that's establishing a hierarchy it seems
like elon's having a good time with his
rockets and his X and Tesla and I think
I think that there is I think that the
antithesis of of tyranny is play it took
me a long time to realize that like I've
been studying evil intensely since I was
about 13 and evil is easier to Define
than good it's it's it's hard to find a
category that integrates all that's good
that's that you can point to Simply but
it
has the fact that play is the antithesis
of tyranny seems to be a pretty good
summation like pep showed for example
that play wouldn't emerge among animals
if they were possessed by any other
motivational state things have to be set
up very carefully before play will
emerge your house is
optimally structured if your children
can play your marriage is optimally
structured if you're playing house with
your wife and I think that that reality
of the what would you
say the optimally superordinate nature
of play that makes itself manifest when
you're watching someone who's a master
at their task and musk is playing and
hopefully that will you know and Trump
plays too it's one of the things that
made me less uncertain about
him he's deadly funny now it's rough he
plays rough no doubt about it but he's
ridiculously he's got a ridiculously
comic touch and that's not something
that's generally characteristic of you
know Psychopathic dictators Hitler
wasn't known for his sense of humor
let's talk about sense of humor if you
don't mind um because um I think it's
something that's sorely lacking in a lot
of the uh discourse among adults um so
to speak and I think these days I think
a lot about what young people are
observing a few years back I I was
watching this show I didn't like it um
called forgive me because I think the
actor was quite good um but the show was
Californication with David dukovany and
I realized this show is all about the
adults acting like children and the
children acting like adults oh yeah
that's that's a typical Hollywood
inversion and I thought um this is
terrible um not because I'm some sort of
moral Avenger or something but it just
it was sort of like the question I've
been asking myself a lot over the last
few years is like who are the adults in
the room like who's actually regulating
all this stuff that's happening
everyone's in disagreement people are
are misbehaving in the kind of worst of
ways um by you know not treating each
other with respect um occasionally you'd
see a discourse that would felt like
meaningful and structured or um
explorative in the real sense like
people were there to learn I think
that's been one of the successes of of
your work and of Rogan's work and I like
to think you know my podcast as well Lex
fredman certainly and others right um
sometimes people use comedy sometimes
people use Neuroscience as as a as a
probe but in any case but you know I've
been concerned that there
there isn't this kind of like enjoyment
of discourse between people that
disagree in a way that includes
forgiveness or like ah you got like good
one like you got me or you know and and
um it seems like it it's degenerated
into things that are so nasty and it's
sort of like people are entering the
game if you could even call it that with
a refusal to shift like like that's not
a debate that's there's nothing playful
about it like you have to be willing to
have a winner and a loser and you have
to be willing to be either one if you're
going to engage in real in in real
discourse in real play and to me um it
it's like okay I can manage seeing all
that or participate or not participate
to the extent that I want but for young
people it's got to be really
discouraging it's like you either dunk
on somebody or get dunked on well you
know I guess the optimistic repost to
that would be the fact that the people
that you're pointing to like Rogan who
is a comedian like many of the people
who've become become extremely
successful as podcasters Constantine
kissen Russell Brand Dave
Rubin
um Crowder Steven Crowder pH vaugh
that's a lot of comedians so there's a
lot of play in the alternative media and
a lot of young people are being informed
by the alternative media so I think
there's genuine room for optimism there
um and there's plenty of play in those
podcasts
now a group of us eight years ago seven
years ago put out an offer to the
Democratic powers that be to invite the
Democrats to come and talk to us Ruben
was part of that Rogan was part of that
if I remember correctly I'm quite
certain of it I was part of that Shapiro
was part of that this was a genuine
invitation which was extended many times
in serious Ways by people who are very
well connected among the Democratic
Elite and that came to nothing they want
no part of it nope they'd speak to me
for example privately never publicly
virtually never almost without exception
all the while the alternative media was
gaining more and more power all the
while we were telling them this isn't
optional your Legacy Media foothold is
dying wake up well Rogan for example you
can could imagine that he would be on
board with such a thing because he's not
precisely your stereotypical Republican
no well no not at all right people will
people will call him that they try and
you know manosphere bro whatever that it
doesn't it the reality Falls so far from
when you not true at all it's not true
yeah so so there is plenty of play and
and I so I think we can be positive
about that and and I think young people
too have seen how successful that could
be I mean Rogan and his codery let's say
wiped out the Legacy
Media well so you can see what the
spirit of playful Adventure can do in a
very short period of time now there's
technological reasons for that too
but technological reasons are not it's
still a stunning phenomenon and a
stunning accomplishment and a very
positive one as far as I'm concerned and
hopefully it will continue yeah the
power pendulum has definitely swung in a
different direction well that became
Stark starkly obvious
when Rogan interviewed Trump that was
the death nail of the Legacy Media it
certainly elevated podcasts and their
their impact and significance across the
board well I think it demonstrated the
fact that they had been elevated right
it was just it was it was evidence of
that was that was so conclusive that
there was no longer any way of qu of of
questioning it even the CNN pundits and
so forth who were very resistant to that
as a hypothesis changed their tune very
rapidly well it was interesting because
Rogan's conversation with Trump was a
serious one Theo's conversation with
Trump was a mixture of serious and less
serious and um I mean I couldn't help
but smile big when um at the
inauguration the thanks went out to a
number of people including Theo vau I
mean if you think about this you think
good for Theo so fun I'm yet to meet him
I I hear he's I really like Theo is so
great because Theo
is like he's he's Backwoods hick to the
core right seriously underclass
background and it's real and he's so
bloody smart and so it's such a fun
combination because he's got this it's
pretty easy if you're elitist to you
know be be what derisive about the in
his back woodsy stick but man there's a
sec there's a First Rate mind lurking
behind that that it's not a Persona
because it's actually him too you know I
can relate to that to a large degree
because you know I came from a very
small town way the hell out in the
middle of nowhere and so I have plenty
in common with Theo but it's it's very
funny to watch it's very funny to see
him do this successfully it's
ridiculously and preposterously comical
that he got to sit down with Trump I
mean I just thought that was that's so
funny and that it was successful and
playful you know that's great and
there's plenty of play in the Republican
Renaissance at the moment whatever that
is I mean it's Republican to call it
that is like that's whatever the hell's
happening it's not conceptualized in
terms of our normal political dichotomy
right I mean we're in Uncharted water
now
hopefully this is why I hope the
Democrats get their act together cuz
every Administration needs an opposition
and if the Democrats continue with this
woke idiocy they're not going to be able
to serve as the proper corrective to the
excesses that will definitely emerge in
the Trump Administration especially if
they face no credible
opposition always happens sorry I didn't
mean to didn't mean to interrupt before
we started we were touching on this a
little bit and you said something which
was that you're hoping for a really
formidable strong Democratic party to
counter the Republican party and you are
and you're saying it again now you're
concerned that if there isn't one that
power corrupts might run a muck oh yes
well of course it will it always does
you know and that the Republicans
themselves who might wish well this
remarkable group of people that's
aggregated around Trumpets like they
should hope for themselves that they
have an effective opposition because
someone's got to be telling you where
you're stupid and if the Democrats so
this is another public invitation to the
Democrats which is like must be the 50th
one that I've issued if you have
something to say you know I'd be happy
to talk and so would many people who've
expressed similar sentiment to me in the
alternative media world and that offer
has been on the table for for years so I
hope
that I'm afraid that all the people with
any real courage or virtually all them
be chased out of the democratic party
they're all afraid of being cancelled
which is why they wouldn't appear on my
podcast to begin with it's like why does
Peterson always interview conservatives
it's like well how come how about
because they'll talk to me you know
there's a simple explanation and
definitely a true one so maybe that can
shift and there's got to be somebody in
the
Democrats who's got enough courage to
forge a new Direction and if they want
to continue with this
same old pattern of woke idiocy well go
right ahead it's not going to work the
Tide's already turned in that regard I
think that judging from some of the um
article titles that I've um seen at uh
New York Times and other venues it seems
like there might be some consideration
about this they're talking about a
restructuring of the democratic party
there who's going to lead who's going to
be their uh Joe Rogan which is by the
way a silly question that's just the
silliest
question we say in science he's n of one
don't don't even try like it's the whole
point is to create why would you would
can't yeah right Joe didn't emerge by
accident Joe is very very very smart
very and if you think and like it's what
it's like Joe built this it's like not
the way that a political party would
build it first of all he didn't build it
not not not that way not through a prior
planning so that the Democrats could
have a voice it's just him being him yes
exactly yeah and someone someone who is
a self-declared Democrat will do that as
well but not by trying to be him that's
just not going to happen no they'll be
they'll they'll do that by trying to
figure out what the opposition to this
new peculiar band of Republicans should
be and what sort of vision could be put
forward that would be attractive you
know I read today some democrat claiming
that the Democrats are the true voice of
the working class it's like I don't
think so
I think that ship is sailed and maybe
the Democrats should be the true voice
of the working class but they're
certainly not and in principle that
would mean that there's an opportunity
there on the Democrat side to forge A
New Path mean Clinton managed that in
the 90s this this has happened many
times it could happen again
but there's a lot of learning that's
going to have to take place before that
happens so certainly learning about this
new alternative media environment if you
can't sit down for three hours and say
what you actually think actually what
you think right regardless of what might
do to your reputation let's say you're
not going to be successful in the
podcast world that's absolutely true
right podcasting is real I even for I'll
just
say because perhaps it's of Interest or
maybe even actionable for people I mean
I I get a little frightened every
podcast certainly if I'm going to talk
about like I'm forming this relationship
to or I'm exploring a I mean I'll talk
about circuits in the brain all day long
with with uh with no fear whatsoever
that's my wheelhouse but anything that's
new uh which is a a real exploration and
evolution of of where I'm at um of
course is going to evoke fear I also
know that's where the growth is I would
hate for this podcast to look the way it
did on episode one now and um clearly
this this conversation is a is a new
direction that I've not taken before in
this podcast and um but I'm delighted
that it's happening want to say that and
I think that some level of fear and
anxiety about the unknown is is
absolutely required and I think that
that's something that hopefully any
especially young people listening need
to know you you're not supposed to
perform well at the outset like in
anything you're not can't that's why
Yung said the fool is the precursor to
the
Redeemer you have to accept the role of
fool voluntarily before you can improve
improve of course when you start
something new you're going to be an
idiot like what do you know so so that's
the price of Entry is to be a fool well
you can be a voluntary fool and then you
can then you have a bit of a sense of
humor about yourself and that takes the
sting out of it and maybe even makes you
an attractive character despite your
ignorance people will people will make
tremendous allowances for ignorance
that's voluntarily admitted to I've
certainly made mistakes publicly
apologize for the ones that I felt I
should apologize for there's a slip of
the tongue and make it said something
went back and correct it was
embarrassing but um the ability to laugh
at oneself is is tremendously powerful
genuinely laugh like just thinking like
oh God where was I thing I understand
this
I you know sometimes we we air you know
I have a couple of questions about you
oh oh um I know you're the you're the
clinician but uh and I'm not trying to
play that
role when you wake up in the morning is
your mind in a good place typ Al or are
you tormented or you where does your
where does your mind land most mornings
first
thing well I've I've suffered from a
proclivity towards depression my whole
life I would say and I would say the
roughest part of the day for me is
morning although it's way better than it
once was um so when I get up I have a
shower and make my bed and do something
useful and then I'm pretty
much I'm on my way you're into your
tasks into the day MH and I I still have
quite a lot of pain from whatever
happened to me a couple of years ago and
so that's annoying physical pain yeah
yeah yeah so but
psychologically my life is ridiculously
it's absurdly interesting it's crazily
and absurdly
interesting all the time and so anyone
with any sense would be like open
mouthed in amazement and gratitude for
that it's
Preposterous and I have this tour that's
going well it's been going for like six
years really and your tour schedule is
is super human I have to say having done
some live shows I mean what you do with
tours and I've been to one of your shows
I highly recommend people attend it was
spectacular I I don't want to give too
much away but it's not planned in the in
the sense that there's a script or
something it's very open and and but a
real it's a quest an intellectual Quest
right it's a real experience and men
wear your jacket and tie because
everyone else there going be wearing at
least a jack up look look look
respectable so my wife and I are touring
from January through June and much of
that's in the United States and then two
months in Europe and so that's great
because Europe is in trouble and going
there to speak is a privilege and an
honor and so that's ridic ridiculously
exciting and people can find more out
about the tour at jordanbpeterson.com
the dates and so forth are all listed
there um we launched Peterson Academy we
where we want you to teach and that's
going spectacularly well we had a place
where people can hear lectures in a
given domain yep yep yep we have 35
lectures online already each of them is
sequenced over 6 to8 hours um which
compacts I would say the equivalent of a
full University course into that span of
time we're pursuing accreditation which
I think is a high probability in the
relatively not too distant future so
that's ridiculously exciting because we
can take the best lectures in the world
and we can make them available to
everyone and we built a social media
element into it we took the best of the
social media networks and people are
using it like mad and it's 100% positive
it's philosophically oriented it's
mutually encouraging we threw four
people off the platform out of 40,000
well three cuz we put one guy on
probation cuz he said he'd improve and
we established a positive culture
there's no Bots there's no trolls no
one's playing games and we watch and now
you know the community has settled into
a it's got an ethos already and I think
that'll be self- sustaining so people
are there to learn and to support each
other learning got it it it launched out
of the gate better than we thought it
would even though we were optimistic and
I would say the quality of what we're
offering exceeded it certainly exceeded
my expectations it's well we we showed
Michael malice Michael malice did a
course for us on totalitarianism and he
takes that rather personally given his
family background and he said that the
trailer brought him to tears and that's
my now I can be easily brought to tear
so I don't know if I'm the best like
around certain topics I've cried a times
on this podcast this year and a few
others so that was that was a uh a
vulnerability I'd never expected but
yeah well it's good to know I'm not
alone in that not alone I'm less
susceptible now that I'm more healthy
but but I feel the same way about what
we're producing because it's exactly if
you were a professor and you wanted the
best possible courses to be available to
people and you saw these you'd think
target hit and and that's ridiculously
fun and so and I have a great
relationship with my wife and my kids
and you have some grandkids now too I do
and two more on the way W
congratulations you
know with and I have an endless field of
Stellar opportunity in front of me so
hopefully I have enough sense to
appreciate that and hope and I do I do
appreciate it and I know it's unlikely
so a long way from posting lectures on
YouTube which is where uh most people
originally found you if they wereing
about that that's certainly how I
learned about you I thought this guy's
talking about really interesting things
in the fields of psychology he knows who
Yak PP is and um and he's posting on
YouTube can I ask what inspired that
move was that from well conscious was
that calling or
conscience or both um it was probably
mostly calling because the fundamental
motivation was and I think it is my
fundamental motivation is curiosity you
know I watched YouTube and I thought
H what the hell is
this video on demand
worldwide what does that mean it means
the spoken word is now as permanent as
the written word and more easily
disseminated I thought oh that's a
spectacular and World altering
Revolution that's what it looks like to
me this was like in 2010
you know when it was mostly cat
videos I
thought might as well put my videos up
there and see what
happens and so see what happens right
that's an adventure and
so I did that
for maybe maybe seven years somewhere
between five and seven years before
things exploded around me and that was
also extremely helpful because when I
opposed
the Trudeau government's attempt to
compel my
speech in the form of Bill c16 I was
immediately pillared as a you know
right-wing Nazi even though I'd spent my
whole
career publicizing the horrors of the
Nazi Administration and teaching my
students how not to fall prey to
totalitarian Temptation like that was
the core of my
career um I had like 200 hours of
lectures up on you already so when all
that negative attention was drawn to me
people started looking at the lectures
and the huge Advantage there was that
there wasn't a single really there
wasn't a single important word I'd said
to students in the last 20 years that
wasn't
recorded and the people who decided that
you know I was a reprehensible character
had every opportunity to go through
everything I'd said with a fine- tooth
comb which you can be absolutely certain
they did and they couldn't find one
thing I ever said that led any Ence
whatsoever to their accusations and so
that was a Breaking Point in some
ways for cancel culture
because there were very forceful
attempts to counsel me and so people
went and checked me out and they thought
huh nothing he says falls into alignment
with what he's being accused about well
you know that
what would you
say that was part of the dam breaking
with regards to the corruption of the
Legacy
Media So Not only was what I was accused
of a lie it was exactly the opposite of
the truth which is the most profound
kind of lie so YouTube helped me out a
lot
there you've certainly prevailed and uh
we're all so far well I guess that that
speaks to what I was going to say which
is that um I want to thank you for
posting those videos on YouTube and for
entering that Adventure because it
certainly was the beginning of a long
adventure that's still happening now
where you continue to take risks that
are healthy risks in service to trying
to understand the truth and share that
and I must say never with the the stance
that you know absolutely right for
everybody but certainly where you have
felt you could share useful knowledge at
the Practical level like really how to
operationalize like clean up your room
right you know um do these things to try
and discover your path get on your path
set your sights to the right level um
and to make that a daily practice and a
and a repeated lifelong practice is
really spectacular and it's obviously
inspired millions of people including
myself I'll also say that it's really
wonderful that you are also continuing
to do that that yourself and making that
visible to people your Live Events of
course are an exploration in the moment
where you raise a question and ask a
question and address it it's not
pre-planned and I must say that your
progression of books and podcasts and
where things are going now in particular
that today you said you are hopeful that
the Democratic party I think most people
assume that you're very right leaning
I'm not going to assume one way or the
other but the fact that you are
intentionally inviting and hoping for
opposition so that power is checked and
things continue in the right direction I
think that's really beautiful because
what you're asking for is more balance
as opposed to more skewing of knowledge
and power and I think um that's a
terrific example and it's clear that you
live right near the edge uh in order to
inspire us to basically explore
knowledge explore ancient teachings and
merge them with where we are now yeah
it's been unbelievably rewarding I mean
part of the reason that my wife and I
keep touring is because we meet all
these people and they put their lives
together it's thousands and thousands of
people it's so
gratifying you know wherever we
go the probability that someone will
come up and
say thank you but then when I ask like
for what what do you mean exactly what
changed they tell me and there isn't
anything better that can happen to you
than to travel around the world and have
perfect strangers come up to
you as
friends and tell you that their lives
are far better than they would have been
because of their efforts and because of
their encounter with what you've been
doing like if you could pray for
anything to happen to you there's not a
possibility that you could come up with
a better wish than that and
so it's great it's great and
and it's fascinating to explore its
continuation and to observe the
consequences and it's a privilege to be
in that it's an
immense what would you say it's
unspeakably immense privilege to be in
that position and it's so great to see
people like you and fredman and Chris
Williamson and all these other
podcasters who are pursuing the same
vision and so successfully and to see
the massive effect that's having on
people that's such a good deal so and I
do believe it's the sort of thing
that's in a deeply personalized way
available to anyone who follows their
calling and
conscience well thank you for those
words I I also agree it's freely
available by people being themselves and
as you said following their curiosity
and
conscience thank you for coming here
here today and sharing with us where
you're at now your knowledge and please
come back again I really enjoyed this
hey anytime I appreciate the invitation
very much and uh it's a pleasure
watching your progress forward and
seeing you propagate all the remarkable
discoveries that have been made in in
the field of Neuroscience because it's
quite the credible Enterprise and people
need to know the biology of motivation
let's say and the biology of emotion and
and uh it's great to see
you managing that in a sophisticated way
with so many people it's a good deal for
everybody thank you it's a labor of love
ins inspired in no small part by you and
my other podcast colleagues and in your
case my academic colleague so thank you
Jordan thank you for joining me for
today's discussion with Dr Jordan
Peterson to find links to Dr Peterson's
work his social media his new book we
who wrestle with God as well as a link
to the Peterson Academy please see the
show note captions if you're learning
from and are enjoying this podcast
please subscribe to our YouTube channel
that's a terrific zero cost way to
support us please also click follow for
the podcast on both Spotify and apple
and on both Spotify and apple you can
leave us up to a five-star review please
also check out the sponsors mentioned at
the beginning and throughout today's
episode that's the best way to support
this podcast if you have questions for
me or comments about the podcast or
topics or guests that you'd like me to
consider for the hubman Lab podcast
please put those in the comment section
on YouTube I do read all the comments
and if you're not already following me
on social media I am huberman lab on all
social media platforms so that's
Instagram X formerly known as Twitter
Facebook threads and Linkedin and on all
those platforms I discuss science and
science related tools some of which
overlaps with the content of the hubman
Lab podcast but much of which is
distinct from the content on the
huberman Lab podcast again that's hubman
lab on all social media platforms for
those of you that haven't heard I have a
new book coming out it's my very first
book it's entitled protocols an
operating manual for the human body this
is a book that I've been working on for
more than 5 years and that's based on
more than 30 years of research and
experience and it covers protocols for
everything from sleep to exercise to
Stress Control protocols related to
focus and motivation and of course I
provide the scientific substantiation
for the protocols that are included the
book is now available by pre-sale at
protocols book.com there you can find
links to various vendors you can pick
the one that you like best again the
book is called protocols an operating
manual for the human body and if you
haven't already subscribe to our neural
network newsletter the neural network
newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly
newsletter that includes everything from
podcast summaries to what we call
protocols in the form of brief 1 to
three page PDFs that cover things like
how to optimize your sleep how to
regulate your dopamine we also have
protocols related to deliberate cold
exposure get a lot of questions about
that deliberate heat exposure and on and
on again all available at completely
zero cost you simply go to hubman
lab.com go to the menu tab in the top
right corner scroll down to newsletter
and enter your email and I should
mention that we do not share your email
with anybody thank you once again for
joining me for today's discussion with
Dr Jordan Peterson and last but
certainly not least thank you for your
interest in science

- "Battle not with monsters,
lest ye become a monster,
and if you gaze into the abyss,
the abyss gazes also into you."
- Right, but I would say,
bring it on.
If you gaze into the abyss long enough,
you see the light, not the darkness.
- Are you sure about that?
- I'm betting my life on it.
- The following is a conversation
with Jordan Peterson,
an influential psychologist,
lecturer, podcast host,
and author of "Maps of Meaning",
12 Rules For Life" and "Beyond Order."
This is the Lex Fridman podcast,
to support it please
check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now dear friends,
here's Jordan Peterson.
Dostoevsky wrote in "The Idiot",
spoken through the
character of Prince Myshkin
that beauty will save the world.
Solzhenitsyn actually mentioned this
in his Nobel Prize acceptance speech.
What do you think does
Dostoevsky meant by that?
Was he right?
- Well,
I guess it's the divine
that saves the world,
let's say, you could
say that by definition.
And then you might say, "Well,
are there pointers to that
which will save the world
or that which eternally saves the world?"
And the answer to that
in all likelihood is yes.
And that's maybe truth
and love and justice
and the classical virtues,
beauty perhaps in some sense
foremost among them.
That's a difficult case to
make, but definitely a pointer.
- Which direction is the arrow pointing?
- Well, the arrow's pointing up.
And no, I think that that
which it points to is,
what beauty points to,
it transcends beauty.
It's more than beauty.
- And that speaks to the divine.
- It points to the divine.
Yeah, and I would say again by definition,
'cause we could define the
divine in some real sense.
So one way of defining the
divine is what is divine to you
is your most fundamental axiom.
And you might say, "Well, I
don't have a fundamental axiom."
Then I would say, "That's fine."
But then you're just confused
'cause you have a bunch
of contradictory axioms.
And you might say, "Well,
I have no axioms at all."
And then I'd say, "Well,
you're just epistemologically
ignorant beyond comprehension
if you think that,
'cause that's just not true at all."
- So you don't think a human being
can exist within contradictions?
- Well, yeah we have to
exist within contradiction,
but when the contradictions
make themselves manifest,
say in confusion with regard to direction,
then the consequence of
that technically is anxiety
and frustration and disappointment
and all sorts of other negative emotions.
But the cardinal negative
emotion signifying
multiple pathways forward is anxiety.
It's an entropy signal.
- But you don't think that
kind of entropy signal
can be channeled into beauty, into love?
Why does beauty and love have
to be clear, ordered, simple?
- Well, I would say it
probably doesn't have to be...
It can't be reduced to
clarity and simplicity
because when it's optimally structured,
it's a balance between order and chaos.
Not order itself.
If it's too ordered, if
music is too ordered,
it's not acceptable.
It sounds like a drum machine.
It's too repetitive. It's too predictable.
It has to have, well, it
has to have some fire in it.
- Yes.
- Along with the structure.
I was in Miami doing a seminar on Exodus
with a number of scholars.
And this is a beauty discussion.
When Moses first encounters
the burning bush,
it's not a conflagration
that demands attention.
It's something that catches his attention.
It's a phenomena and that
means to shine forth.
And Moses has to stop and
attend to it and he does.
And he sees this fire that
doesn't consume the tree
and the tree, the tree
is a structure, right?
It's a tree like structure.
It's a branching structure.
It's a hierarchical structure.
It's a self-similar structure.
It's a fractal structure,
and it's the tree of life
and it's the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil.
And the fire in it is the transformation
that's always occurring
within every structure.
And the fact that the fire
doesn't consume the bush
in that representation is
an indication of the balance
of transformation with structure.
And that balance is presented as God.
And what attracts Moses to it,
in some sense, is the beauty.
Now it's the novelty and all that,
but like a painting is
like a burning bush.
That's a good way of thinking
about it. A great painting.
It's too much for people often.
My house was and will soon be again,
completely covered with paintings inside.
And it was hard on people to come in there
because, well my mother, for example,
say, well, "Why would you
wanna live in a museum?"
And I'd think, well, I would
rather live in a museum
than anywhere else in some real sense.
But beauty is daunting.
It scares people.
They're terrified of
buying art, for example,
because their taste is on display
and they should be terrified
because generally people
have terrible taste.
Now that doesn't mean
they shouldn't foster it
and develop it but...
And when you put your taste on display,
it really exposes you.
- Even to yourself as you walk past it?
- Oh definitely.
- Every day.
- Absolutely.
- This is who I am.
- Yeah, well, and look how mundane that is
and look how trite it is
and look at how cliche it is
and look at how sterile or too
ordered it is or too chaotic.
- Or how quickly you start
to take it for granted
because you've seen it so many times.
- [Jordan] Well, if it's
a real piece of art,
that doesn't happen.
- You notice the little details.
- The whole is greater
than the sum of the parts.
I mean, there are images,
religious images in particular
so we could call them deep images
that people have been
unpacking for 4,000 years
and still have, I'll give you an example.
This is a terrible example.
So I did a lecture series on Genesis
and I got a lot of it unpacked,
but by no means all of it.
When God kicks Adam and Eve
out of the Garden of Eden,
he puts cherubim with
flaming swords at the gate
to stop human beings
from reentering paradise.
I thought, what the hell
does that mean, cherubim?
And why do they have flaming
swords? I don't get that.
What is that exactly?
And then I found out from Matthew Pageau
who wrote a great book
on symbolism in Genesis
that cherubim are the
supporting monsters of God.
It's a very complicated idea.
And that they're partly
a representation of that
which is difficult to fit
into conceptual systems.
They've also got an
angelic or demonic aspect,
take your pick.
Why do they have flaming swords?
Well, a sword is a symbol of judgment
and the separation of
the wheat from the chaff,
use a sword to cut away,
to cut away and to carve.
And a flaming sword is not
only that which carves,
it's that which burns.
And what does it carve away and burn?
Well, you wanna get into paradise?
It carves away everything
about you that isn't perfect.
And so what does that mean?
Okay, well, here's part of what it means.
This is a terrible thing.
So you could say that the
entire Christian narrative
is embedded in that image.
Why?
Well, let's say that flaming
swords are a symbol of death.
That seems pretty obvious.
Let's say further that they're a symbol
of apocalypse and hell.
That doesn't seem completely unreasonable.
So here's an idea.
Not only do you have to face death,
you have to face death and hell
before you can get to paradise.
Hellish judgment and all
that's embedded in that image.
And a piece of art with an image like that
has all that information in it.
And it shines forth in
some fundamental sense.
It reaches into the back
tendrils of your mind
at levels you can't even
comprehend and grips you.
I mean, that's why people go to museums
and gaze at paintings
they don't understand.
And that's why they'll pay...
What's the most expensive
objects in the world?
If it's not carbon fiber racing yachts,
it's definitely classic paintings, right?
It's high level technological implements
or it's classic art.
Well, why are those things so expensive?
Why do we build temples
to house the images?
Even secular people go to museums.
"I'm secular."
Well, are you in a museum?
"Yes." Are you looking at art?
"Yes."
Well, what makes you
think you're secular then?
- It's arguable that the thing
many, many centuries from now
that will remain of all
of human civilization
will be our art.
Not even the words.
- Well, you know, a book has remained
a very long time, right?
The biblical readings.
- Not that long.
- No, that's right.
- But that's in the full arc
of living organisms.
- Yeah.
- Perhaps will not-
- Well, we have images that are,
we have artistic images that
are at least 50,000 years old,
right, that have survived.
And some of those are,
they're already profound
in their symbolism.
- By we, do you mean humans?
- Yeah.
We found them and
they've lasted that long.
And then think about Europe.
Secular people all over the world
make pilgrimages to Europe.
Well, why?
Because of the beauty.
Obviously, I mean, that's self-evident,
and it's partly because
there are things in Europe
that are so beautiful they
take your breath away, right?
They make your hair stand on end.
They fill you with a sense of awe.
And we need to see those things.
It's not optional.
We need to see those things.
The cathedrals.
I was in the cathedral in Vienna
and it was terribly beautiful, you know?
- Terribly beautiful.
- Well,
it was terribly beautiful.
- Is beauty painful for you is?
Is that the highest form of beauty?
It really challenges you.
- Oh, definitely.
Yeah. Yeah.
I got a good analysis
of the Statue of David,
Michelangelo statue,
says, "You could be
far more than you are."
That's what that statue says.
(Lex laughing)
And this cathedral, we went down into
the understructure of it
and there were three floors
of bones from the plague.
And there they all are.
And then that cathedral's on top of it.
It's no joke to go
visit a place like that.
It rattles you to the core.
And our religious systems have become
propositionally dubious,
but there's no arguing
with the architecture,
although modern architects
like to with their sterility
and their giant middle
fingers erected everywhere.
But beauty is a terrible pointer to God.
And you know, a secular person will say,
"Well, I don't believe in God."
It's like, have it your way.
You cannot move forward
into the unforeseen horizon
of the future except on faith.
And you might say,
"Well, I have no faith."
It's like, well, good
luck with the future then,
because what are you then?
Nihilistic and hopeless
and anxiety ridden.
And if not, well, something's
guiding you forward,
it's faith in something
or multiple things,
which just makes you a polytheist,
which I wouldn't recommend.
- Well, let me ask you one short lived
biological meat bag to another,
who is God then?
Let's try to sneak up to this question
if it's at all possible.
Is it possible to even talk about this?
- Well, it better be because otherwise
there's no communicating about it, right?
It has to be something that
can be brought down to earth.
- Well, we might be too
dumb to bring it down.
- It's not just ignorant.
It's also sinful, right?
So, because there's not knowing
and then there's wanting to
know or refusing to know.
- Yeah.
- And so you might say, "Well,
could you extract God from a description
of the objective world, right?
Is God just the ultimate
unity of the natural reality?
And I would say, "Well, in a sense,
there's some truth in that,
but not exactly because
God in the highest sense
is the spirit that you must
emulate in order to thrive.
How's that for a biological definition?
Spirit is a pattern.
The spirit that you must
emulate in order to thrive.
- So it's a kind of, in one sense,
when we say the human spirit, it's that?
- It's an animating principle. Yeah.
It's a meta, it's a pattern.
And you might say, "Well,
what's the pattern?
Okay. Well, I can tell
you that to some degree.
Imagine that like your grip by beauty,
you're gripped by admiration.
And you can just notice
this, this isn't proposition.
You have to notice it.
It's like, oh, turns out
I admire that person.
Hmm.
So what does that mean?
Well, it means I would
like to be like him or her.
That's what admiration means.
It means there's something
about the way they are
that compels imitation, another instinct.
Or inspires respect or awe even.
Okay. What is that that grips you?
Well, I don't know.
Well, let's say, okay, fine.
But it grips you and
you wanna be like that.
Kids hero worship, for example.
So do adults for that matter,
unless they become entirely cynical.
- I worship quite a few heroes.
- Yeah. Well, there you go.
- Proudly.
- Yes. Well, there you go.
And that worship, that celebration
and proclivity to imitate is worship.
That's what worship
means most fundamentally.
Now imagine you took the
set of all admirable people
and you extracted AI learning,
you extracted out the central features
of what constitutes admirable.
And then you did that
repeatedly until you purified it
to what was most admirable.
That's as good as you're gonna get
in terms of a representation of God.
And you might say, "Well,
I don't believe in that."
It's like, well, what do you mean?
- Yeah.
- It's not a set
of propositional facts.
It's not a scientific theory
about the structure of
the objective world.
And then I could say
something about that too,
'cause I've been thinking
about this a lot,
especially since talking
to Richard Dawkins.
It's like, okay, the postmodernist types,
going back way before
Derrida and Foucault,
maybe back to Nietzsche who
I admire greatly by the way,
He says, "God is dead."
It's like, okay.
But Nietzsche said, God is
dead and we have killed him
and we'll not find enough water
to wash away all the blood."
So that was Nietzsche. He's no fool.
- He's got away with words.
- He certainly does.
And so then you think, okay,
well we killed the transcendent.
Well, what does that mean for science?
Well, it frees it up
because all that nonsense
about a deity is just
the idiot superstition
that stops the scientific,
what process from moving forward.
That's basically the new atheist
claim. Something like that.
It's like, wait a second.
Do you believe in the transcendent
if you're a scientist?
And the answer is, well,
not only do you believe in it,
you believe in it more than anything else,
because if you're a scientist,
you believe in what
objects to your theory,
more than you believe in your theory.
Now we gotta think that
through very carefully.
So your theory describes the world
and as far as you're concerned,
you description of the world is the world.
But because you're a
scientist, you think, well,
even though that's my
description of the world
and that's what I believe,
there's something beyond what I believe,
and that's the object.
And so I'm gonna throw my
theory against the object
and see where it'll break.
And then I'm going to use
the evidence of the break
as a source of new information
to revitalize my theory.
So as a scientist, you
have to posit the existence
of the ontological transcendent
before you can move forward at all.
But more,
you have to posit that contact
with the ontological transcendent.
Annoying though it is because
it upsets your apple cart
is exactly what will in fact set you free
so then you accept the proposition
that there is a transcendent reality
and that contact with
that transcend reality
is redemptive in the
most fundamental sense,
because if it wasn't,
well, why would you bother
making contact with it?
You're gonna make
everything worse or better?
- Why does the contact with a transcendent
set you free as a scientist?
- Because you assume,
I mean, freedom in the
most fundamental sense,
it's like, well, freedom from
want, freedom from disease,
freedom from ignorance, right?
That it informs you.
The logos in it.
- So it's the why of science?
- It is definitely that.
Yeah, it's the direction, let's say,
the directionality of science.
That's a narrative direction,
not a scientific direction.
And then the question is
what is the narrative?
Well, it posits at transcendent reality.
It posits that the transcendent
reality is corrective.
It posits that our knowledge structure
should be regarded with humility.
It posits that you should
bow down in the face
of the transcendent evidence.
And you have to take a vow.
You know this as a scientist,
you have to take a vow to follow that path
if you're gonna be a real scientist.
It's like the truth, no matter what.
And that means you posit the
truth as a redemptive force.
Well, what does redemptive mean?
Well, why bother with science?
Well, so people don't starve,
so people can move about more effectively,
so life can be more abundant, right?
So it's all ensconced
within an underlying ethic.
So the reason I was saying that
while we were talking about belief in God,
it's like this is a very
complicated topic, right?
Do you believe in a transcendent reality?
See, okay, now let's
say you buy the argument
I just made on the natural front,
and you say, "Yeah,
yeah, that's just nature.
That's not God."
And then I'd say, "Well,
what makes you think
you know what nature is?"
Like, see, the problem
with that argument is that
it already presumes a
materialist, a reductionist,
materialist objective view
of what constitutes nature.
But if you're a scientist,
you're gonna think,
well, in the final analysis,
I don't know what nature is.
I certainly don't know its
origin or destination point.
I don't know its teleology.
I'm really ignorant about nature.
And so when I say it's nothing but nature,
I shouldn't mean it's nothing
but what I understand nature to be.
So I could say, will we have
a fully reductionist account
of cognitive processes?
And the answer to that is yes
but by the time we do that,
our understanding of matter
will have transformed so much
that what we think of as reduction now
won't look anything like what
we think of reductionism now.
Matter isn't dead dust.
I don't know what it is.
I have no idea what it is.
Matter is what matters.
There's a definition.
That's a very weird definition,
but the notion that we have
that if you're a reductionist,
a materialist reductionist,
that you can reduce the
complexity of what is
to your assumptions about
the nature of matter,
that's not a scientific proposition.
- Your specific limited human assumptions
of this century of this week.
- You bet.
- So in some sense,
without God in this complicated,
big definition we're talking about,
there's no humility.
Or-
- There's not enough.
- There's less likely to be,
or rather science can err
in taking a trajectory
away from humility.
- Well-
- Without something much more powerful
than individual human.
- Yeah, well then, and we
know the Frankenstein story
comes out of that instantly.
And that's a good story
for the current times.
It's like you're playing
around with making new life.
You bloody well better make sure
you have your arrows pointed up.
- And it's interesting
because you said science has
an ethic to it I think.
- It's embedded in an ethic.
- Well, there's a, you
know, science is a big word.
- Yeah.
- And it includes a lot
of disciplines that have
different traditions.
So biology, chemistry,
genetics, physics,
those are very different communities.
And I think biology,
especially when you get
closer and closer to medicine
and to the human body,
does have a very serious, first of all,
it has a history with Nazi
Germany of being abused
and all those kinds of things.
But it has a history of
taking this stuff seriously.
What doesn't have a history
of taking this stuff seriously
is robotics and artificial intelligence,
which is really interesting
because you don't, you know,
you called me a scientist,
and I would like to
wear that label proudly,
but often people don't
think of computer science
as a science, but nevertheless it will be
I think one of the major scientific fields
of the 21st century
and you should take that very seriously.
Oftentimes when people
build robots or AI systems,
they think of them as
toys to tinker with.
Oh, isn't this cool?
- Mm-hmm. Well that-
- And I feel this too.
Isn't this cool?
- It is cool.
- But at a certain moment you might,
isn't this nuclear explosion cool?
- Yeah.
- Because it is.
- Or birth control pill cool.
It's like, or transistor cool. Yeah.
Well, the other thing too,
and this is a weird problem in some sense,
robotics engineer types,
they're thing people, right?
I mean, the big classes of interest
are interest in things
versus interest in people.
- [Lex] Some of my best
friends are thing people.
- Yeah. Right.
And thing, people are very,
very clear logical thinkers
and they're very outcome
oriented and practical.
And that's all good.
That makes the machinery
and keeps it functioning,
but there's a human side of the equation.
And you get the extreme
thing people and you think,
yeah, well, what about the human here?
And when we're talking about,
we've been talking about the necessity
of having a technological
enterprise embedded in an ethic,
and you can ignore that like
most of the time, right?
You can ignore the overall
ethic in some sense
when you're toying around with your toys.
But when you're building
an artificial intelligence,
it's like, well,
that's not a toy.
That might be-
- [Lex] A toy becomes
the monster very quickly.
- Yeah, yeah. Yes, yes.
And this is a whole new kind of monster.
And maybe it's already here.
Yes and you notice how
many of those things
you can no longer turn off.
And what is it with you
engineers and your inability
to put off switches on things now?
It's like I have to hold
this for five seconds
for it to shut off, or I can't figure,
I just want to shut it off.
Click off.
- Well, what is it with you humans
that don't put off
switches in other humans,
because there's a magic to
the thing that you notice
and it hurts for both
you and perhaps one day
the thing itself to turn it off.
- Mm-hmm.
- And so you have to be
very careful as an engineer
adding off switches to things.
I think it's a feature,
not a bug, the off switch.
The off switch gives a
deadline to us humans,
to systems of existence.
It makes you, it's, you
know, death is the thing
that really brings clarity to life.
And I do think-
- Yes,
hence the flaming swords.
- The flaming sword.
I do like your view of
the flame with the bush
and perhaps the sword as
a thing of transformation.
It's also a transformation
that kind of consumes
the thing in the process.
- Well, it depends on how
much of the thing is chaff.
This is why you can't touch
the arc of the covenant,
for example.
And this is why people can have
very bad psychedelic trips.
It's like if you're 95% dead wood
and you get too close to the flame.
- Yeah.
- The 5% that's left
might not be able to make it.
- So you think it's all chaff,
but I think there is some
aspect of destruction
that is
the Bukowski line of,
"Do what you love and let it kill you."
- Right.
- Don't you think
that destruction is part of-
- That's humility.
- That's humility. That's-
- You bet. You bet.
You bet.
It's like invite in the judgment.
Invite in the judgment,
because maybe you can die a little bit
instead of dying completely.
- Yeah.
- And I think it's Alfred North Whitehead.
"We can let our ideas die instead of us."
Right?
We can have these partial
personalities that we can burn off
and we can let them go before they become
tyrannical pharaohs
and we lose everything.
And so, yeah, there's this
optimal bite of death.
And who knows what it would
mean to optimize that?
Like what if it was possible
that if you died enough
all the time that you
could continue to live?
And the thing is, we already
know that biologically,
because if you don't die
properly all the time,
well, it's cancerous outgrowths.
Like it's a very fine
balance between productivity
on the biological front and
the culling of that, right?
Life is a real balance
between growth and death.
And so what would happen if
you got that balance right?
Well, we kind of know, right?
Because if you live your
life properly, so to speak,
and you're humble enough
to let your stupidity die
before it takes you out,
you will live longer.
That's just a fact.
Well, but then what's the
ultimate extension of that?
And the answer is we don't
know. We have no idea.
- Well, let me ask you a
difficult question, because-
- As opposed to the easy ones
that you've been asking so far.
- Well, Dostoevsky's
always just a warm up.
So if death every single day is the way
to progress through life,
you have become quite famous.
- Death and hell.
- Death and hell.
- Yeah. Yeah.
'Cause you don't wanna
forget the hell part.
- Do you worry that your fame
traps you into the person
that you were before?
- Yeah, well, even Elvis
became an Elvis impersonator
by the time he died.
- Yeah.
Do you fear that you have become
a Jordan Peterson impersonator?
Do you fear of, in some
part becoming the famous
suit wearing brilliant Jordan Peter,
the certainty in the pursuit
of truth, always right.
- I think I worry about it
more than anything else.
I hope. I hope I do. I better.
- Has fame to some degree,
when you look at yourself in the mirror,
in the quiet of your mind,
has it corrupted you?
- No doubt. In some regard.
I mean, it's a very difficult
thing to avoid, you know,
because things change around you.
People are much more likely to
do what you ask for example.
Right?
And so that's a danger
because one of the things
that keeps you dying properly is that
people push back against you optimally.
This is why so many celebrities
spiral out of control,
especially the tyrannical
types that say, run countries.
Everyone around them stops saying, "Yeah,
you're deviating a little bit there."
They laugh at all their jokes.
They open all their doors.
They always want something from them.
The red carpet's always rolled out.
It's like, well, you think
wouldn't that be lovely?
Well, not if the red
carpet is rolled out to you
while you're on your way to perdition.
That's not a good deal.
You just get there more efficiently.
And so one of the things that
I've tried to learn to manage
is to have people around me all the time
who are critics, who are saying,
"Yeah, you could have done that better
and you're a little too harsh there
and you're alienating
people unnecessarily there
and you should have done some
more background work there."
And I think the responsibility
attendant upon that
increases as your influence increases.
And as you're influence increases,
then that becomes a lot of responsibility.
So, you know, and then
maybe have an off day
and well, here's an example.
I've been writing some columns lately
about things that perturbed me
like the forthcoming famine, for example.
And it's hard to take those problems on.
It's difficult to take those problems on
in a serious manner and it's frightening.
And it would be easier just
to go up to the cottage
with my wife and go out on
the lake and watch the sunset.
And so I'm tempted to draw on
anger as a motivating
energy to help me overcome
the resistance to doing this.
But then that makes me more harsh
and judgemental in my tone
when I'm reading such things
for example on YouTube
then might be optimal.
Now, I've had debates
with people about that.
'cause I have friends who say, "No,
if you're calling out the
environmentalist globalists
who are harassing the Dutch farmers,
then a little anger is just the ticket."
But then others say, "Well, you know,
you don't want to be too harsh
because you alienate people
who would otherwise listen to you."
It's like that's a hard
balance to get right.
- But also maybe anger hardens your mind
to where you don't notice the subtle,
quiet beauty of the world.
The quiet love that's always there
that permeates everything.
Sometimes you can become
deeply cynical about the world,
it's the Nietzsche thing.
- Yeah.
- "Battle not with monsters,
les you become a monster."
- Yeah.
- And if you gaze
into the abyss, the abyss
gazes also into you."
- Right.
But I would say bring it on.
(lex laughing)
Right?
'Cause also knowing that
he's absolutely right,
but if you gaze into
the abyss long enough,
you see the light, not the darkness.
- Are you sure about that?
- I'm betting my life on it.
- Yeah, that's a heck of a bet,
because it might distort your mind
to where all you see-
- Is abyss.
- Is abyss.
- Yeah.
- Is the evil in this world-
- Well then I would say you
haven't looked long enough.
You know, that's back to the-
- You're just the-
- The swords, the flaming swords.
It's like, so I said,
the whole story of Christ
was prefigured in that image.
It's like the story of
Christ psychologically
is radical acceptance of
the worst possible tragedy.
That's what it means. That's
what the crucifix means.
Psychologically, it's like gaze upon that
which you are most afraid of.
But that story doesn't end there
'cause in the story, Christ
goes through death into hell.
So death isn't enough.
The of innocent death is not sufficient
to produce redemption.
It has to be a voluntary journey to hell.
And maybe that's true for everyone.
And that's like, there is
no more terrifying idea
than that by definition.
And so then, well, do you gaze upon that?
Well.
Who knows? Who knows?
- How often do you gaze
upon death, your own?
How often do you remember, remind yourself
that this ride ends?
- Personally?
- Personally.
- All the time.
- 'Cause you as a deep
thinker and philosopher,
it's easy to start philosophizing
and forgetting that you might die today.
- The angel of death sits on every word.
How's that?
- [Lex] How often do you
actually consciously-
- All the time.
- Notice the angel.
- All the time.
I think it's one of the
things that made me peculiar.
When I was in graduate school,
I had the thought of death
in my mind all the time.
And I noticed that many of
the people that I was with,
these were people I admired fine.
That wasn't part of their character,
but it was definitely part of mine.
I'd wake up every morning.
This happened for years I think.
Time short, get at it.
Time short, get at it.
There's things to do.
And so that was always, it's still there,
and it's still there I would say,
and it's unbearable in some sense.
- Are you afraid of it?
Like what's your relationship-
- Afraid of death?
- Yeah.
- You know, I was ready to die a year ago.
And not casually.
I had people I loved, you know?
So no, I'm not very worried about me,
but I am very worried
about making a mistake.
- Yeah.
- I heard Elon Musk talk about
that a couple of months ago,
it was really a striking moment.
Someone asked him about death
and he said just offhand
and then went on with the conversation.
He said, "That'd be a relief."
And then he went on with the conversation.
And I thought, well, you know,
he's got a lot of weight on his shoulders.
I'm sure that part of him thinks
it'd be easier if this wasn't here at all.
Now he said it offhand,
but it was a telling
moment in my estimation.
- So for him, that's a why live question?
- Hmm.
- The exhaustion of life.
- Yeah.
- If you call it,
life is suffering, but the hardship.
- I'm more afraid of hell than death.
- [Lex] You're afraid of
the thing that follows?
- I don't know if it follows
or if it's always here.
And I think we're gonna find out.
- [Lex] What's the connection
between death and hell?
- I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
- [Lex] Is there something
that needs to be done
before you arrive?
- You're more likely to die terribly
if you live in a manner
that brings you to hell,
that's one connection.
- [Lex] And terribly is a
very deep kind of concept?
Okay.
- Yeah. Yeah.
(Lex sighing)
And that's a definition by the way.
- What do you make of Elon Musk?
You've spoken about
him a bit. You met him.
- I was struck with admiration.
That's what I make of
it and I always think-
- [Lex] Now we'll go back
to this idea of admiration.
- I was think of that as a primary.
Well, it's like do you
find this comedian funny?
It's like, well, I laugh at him.
You know what I mean? It's
not propositional again.
And so there are things I would
like to ask Mr. Musk about.
The Mars venture. I don't
know what he's up to there.
It strikes me as absurd in
the most fundamental sense,
'cause I think, well, it'd
be easier just to build
an outpost in the
Antarctica or in the desert.
- Well, how much of the
human endeavor is absurd?
- Well.
What did Nietzsche say?
"Great men are seldom credited
with their stupidity."
Who the hell knows what Musk is up to.
I mean, obviously he's building rockets.
Now he's motivated
because he wants to build
a platform for life on Mars.
Is that a good idea?
Who am I to say?
He's building the rockets, man,
but I'd like to ask him about it.
- I would like to see that conversation.
I do think that having talked
to him quite a bit offline,
I think these,
several of his ideas like Mars,
like humans becoming a
multi-planetary species
could be one of the things
that human civilization
looks back at as duh,
I can't believe he's one of the few people
that was really pushing this idea
'cause it's the obvious thing
for society, for life to survive.
- Yeah, well it isn't obvious to me
that I'm in any position
to evaluate Elon Musk.
Like I would like to talk to him
and find out what he's up to and why,
but I mean, he's an impossible person.
What he's done is impossible. All of it.
It's like he built an
electric car that works.
Now, does it work completely
and will it replace gas cars or should it?
I don't know,
but if we're gonna build electric cars,
he seems to be the best at that by a lot.
And he more or less did
that, people carp about him,
but he more or less did that by himself.
I know he's very good at
distributing responsibility
and all of that, but he's the spearhead.
And then that was pretty hard.
And then he built a rocket.
At like 1/10 the price of NASA rockets.
And then he shot his car out into space.
That's pretty hard.
And then he's building this Boring Company
more or less as a, what would you call it?
It's sort of, it's this
whimsical joke in some sense,
but it's not a joke.
He's amazing.
- And Neuralink, delving
into the depths of the mind.
- Yeah, and Starlink, it's like go Elon
as far as I'm concerned.
And then, you know, he
puts his finger on things.
So oddly, the problem is under population.
It's like I think so too.
I think it's a terrible
problem that we're.
the West, for example,
is no longer at replacement
with regard to birth rate.
It means we've abandoned
the virgin and the child
in a most fundamental sense.
It's a bloody catastrophe.
And Musk, he sees it clear as can be.
It's like, wow.
And where everyone else
is running around going,
"Oh, there's too many people!"
It's like nope.
Got that.
See, I've learned that there
are falsehoods and lies
and there are anti truths.
And an anti truth is something
that's so preposterous
that you couldn't make a claim
that's more opposite to the truth.
And the claim that there are
too many people on the planet
is an anti truth.
So, you know, people say,"
Well, you have to accept
limits to growth" and etcetera,
it's like
I have to accept the limits
that you're going to impose on me
'cause you're frightened of the future?
That's your theory, is it?
Okay.
- Well, it's an idea.
It could be a right idea.
It could be a wrong idea.
I don't, I think anti truth...
- Well, here, I'll tell you
why it's the wrong idea.
I think.
So imagine that there's
an emergency dragon.
There's a dragon.
And someone comes and
says, "There's a dragon!
I'm the guy to deal with it."
That's what the environmentalists say,
the radical types who
push limits to growth.
Then I look at them and I think, okay,
is that dragon real or not?
That's one question.
Well-
- I ask that question
on myself every time
when I spend time alone.
- Is the apocalypse looming
on the environmental front?
Yes or no. I'll just leave
that aside for the time being.
I think you can make a case both ways
for a bunch of different reasons
and it's not a trivial concern.
And we've over fished the oceans terribly.
And there are environmental
issues that are looming large,
whether climate change is
the cardinal one or not
is a whole different question,
but we won't get into that.
That's not the issue. You're
clamoring about a dragon.
Okay.
Why should I listen to you?
Well, let's see how you're
reacting to the dragon.
First of all, you're scared stiff
and in the state of panic.
That might indicate you're
not the man for the job.
Second, you're willing to use compulsion
to harness other people to
fight the dragon for you.
So now not only are you terrified,
you're a terrified tyrant.
So then I would say,
well then you're not
the Moses that we need
to lead us outta this particular Exodus.
And maybe that's a
neurological explanation.
It's like, if you're so
afraid of what you're facing
that you're terrified into
paralysis and nihilism,
and that you're willing to
use tyrannical compulsion
to get your way,
you are not the right leader for the time.
So then I like someone like
Bjorn Lomborg or Matt Ridley
or Marion Tupy.
And they say, "Well, look,
we've got our environmental problems
and maybe you could make a case
that there's a malthusian
element in some situations,
but fundamentally the track
record of the human race
is that we learn very fast
and faster all the time
to do more with less.
And we've got this.
And I think yes
to that idea.
And I think about it in a fundamental way.
It's like, I trust Lomborg.
I trust Tupy.
I trust Matt Ridley.
They've thought about these things deeply.
They're not just saying,
"Oh, the environment doesn't matter."
Whatever the environment is.
You know, the environment, I
don't even know what that is.
That's everything.
The environment.
I'm concerned about the
environment, it's like...
Which how is that different than saying,
"I'm worried about everything"?
How are those statements
different semantically?
- Well, yeah, the environment, it could be
I'm worried about human society.
A lot of these complex systems
are difficult to talk about
because there's so much involved for sure.
- Yeah. Everything.
And then these models,
'cause people have gone after me
'cause I don't buy the climate models.
Well, I think about the
climate models as extended
into the economic models
because the climate model is,
well, there's gonna be a
certain degree of heating
let's say by 2100.
It's like, okay.
Some of that might be human generated.
Some of it's a consequence
of warming after the Ice Age.
This has happened before, but fair enough.
Let's take your presumption.
Although there are multiple presumptions
and any error in your model
multiplies as time extends,
but have it your way.
Okay, now we're gonna
extend the climate model
so to speak into the economic model.
So I just did an analysis
of a paper by Deloitte.
Third biggest company in the US.
300,000 employees, major
league consultants,
they just produced a report in May.
I wrote an article for
it in "The Telegraph,"
which I'm gonna release this
week on my YouTube channel.
Said, well, if we get the climate problem
under control economically,
'cause that's where the models are now
being generated on the economic front.
So now we have to model the environment,
that's climate,
and we have to model the economy,
and then we have to model
their joint interaction,
and then we have to predict
100 years into the future.
And then we have to put
a dollar value on that.
And then we have to claim
that we can do that,
which we can't.
And then this is our conclusion.
We're going to go through a
difficult period of privation
because if we don't
accept limits to growth,
there's gonna be a catastrophe 50 years
in the future or thereabout.
And so to avert that catastrophe,
we are going to make people poorer.
Now how much poor?
Well, not a lot compared
to how much richer
they're going to be, but definitely,
and they say this in their
own models, definitely poorer,
definitely poorer than they would be
if we just left them the hell alone.
And so then I think, okay,
poorer, ay?
Who?
Well let's look at biologically.
You got a hierarchy, right?
Of stability and security.
That's a hierarchy, or one type.
You stress a hierarchy like
that, a social hierarchy.
So there's birds in a environment.
And an avian flu comes in.
And then you look at the
birds in the social hierarchy
and the low ranking birds
have the worst nests
so they're most exposed
to wind and rain and sun
and farthest from food supplies
and most exposed to predators.
And so those birds are stressed,
which is what happens to you
at the bottom of a hierarchy.
You're more stressed 'cause
your life is more uncertain.
You're more stressed, your
immunological function
is compromised because of that.
You're sacrificing the
future for the present.
An avian flu comes in and the
birds die from the bottom up.
That happens in every epidemic,
you die from the bottom up.
Okay?
So they say, when the
aristocracy catches a cold,
the working class dies of pneumonia.
All right. So now we're
gonna make people poorer.
Okay. Who?
Well, we know who we make poor
when we make people poorer,
we make those who are
barely hanging on poorer.
And what does that mean?
It means they die.
And so what the Deloitte
consultants are basically saying
is, "Well, you know,
it's kind of unfortunate,
but according to our models,
a lot of poor people are gonna have to die
so that a lot more poor people
don't die in the future."
It's like, okay, hold on a sec.
Which of those two things
am I supposed to regard with certainty?
The hypothetical poor people
that you're gonna hypothetically
save 100 years from now,
or the actual poor people
that you are actually going
to kill in the next 10 years?
Well, I'm gonna cast my law
with the actual poor people
that you're actually going to kill.
And then I think further
it's like, well, okay,
the Deloitte consultants,
have you actually modeled the world
or is this a big advertising shtick
designed to attract your corporate clients
with demonstration that
you're so intelligent
that you can actually
model the entire ecosystem
of the world, including
the economic system
and predict it 100 years forward.
And isn't there a bit of a moral hazard
making a claim like that?
Just a trifle, especially when...
So I talked to Bjorn Lomborg
and Michael Leon on last week.
I accepted the UN estimates of
starvation this coming year.
150 million people we'll
suffer food insecurity.
Food insecurity.
Yeah. Food insecurity.
That's the bloody buzzword. Famine.
Well, Michael Yon thought 1.2 billion.
And then that it'll spiral because he said
what happens in a famine
is that the governments go nuts, crazy.
The governments destabilize.
And then they appropriate
the food from the farmers.
Then the farmers don't have any money,
then they can't grow crops.
And I think, yeah, that's
exactly what they do.
That's exactly what would happen.
And so Yon told me 1.2 billion.
And then Bjorn Lomborg
said the same thing.
I didn't even ask him.
He just made it as an offhand comment.
So-
- Let me ask you about
the famine of the 30s.
- Yeah.
- Do you think-
- In the Ukraine.
- In the Ukraine.
- Oh yeah.
Fun, fun, fun.
- Similar.
A lot of the things you mentioned
in the last few sentences
kind of echo to that
part of human history.
- [Jordan] The hole in the door.
No one knows about.
(Lex chuckling)
- Well now I've just spent
four weeks in Ukraine.
- Oh yeah.
- There's different parts
of the world that still,
even if they don't know, they know.
- Yeah. Right.
- They feel history
runs in the blood.
- The Dutch knew in some sense,
they had a famine at
the end of World War II,
and part of the reason the Dutch
farmers are so unbelievably
efficient and productive
is that the Dutch swore
at the end of World War II that
that was not going to happen again.
And then they had to scrape
land out of the ocean
'cause Holland, that's quite a country.
It shouldn't even exist.
The fact that it's the
world's number two exporter,
you know that' it's the
world's number two exporter
of agriculture products, Holland.
It's like I don't think it's
as big as Massachusetts.
It's this little tiny place.
It shouldn't even exist.
And they wanna put, here's the plan.
Let's put 30% of the
farmers out of business.
Well the broader ecosystem
of agricultural production
in Holland is 6% of their GDP.
Now these centralizing politicians think,
tell me if I'm stupid about
this, take an industry,
you knock it back by fiat by 30%.
Now it runs on like a 3% profit margin.
Now you're gonna kill 30% of it.
How are you not gonna
bring the whole thing down?
The whole farming ecosystem down?
How are you not gonna impoverish
the transport systems?
How are you not gonna
demolish the grocery stores?
You can't take something like
that and pare it back by fiat
by 30% and not kill it.
I can't see how you can do that.
I mean, look what we did
with the COVID lockdowns.
We broke the supply chains.
Have you tried buying something lately?
And wait, aren't the
Chinese threatening Taiwan
at the moment?
What are we gonna do without chips?
So I don't know what
these people are thinking.
And then I think, okay,
what are they thinking?
Well, the Deloitte people
are thinking aren't we smart
and shouldn't we be hired
by our corporate employers?
It's like, okay, too bad about the poor.
What are the environmentalist thinking?
We love the planet.
It's like, do you?
We love the poor.
Do you? Okay.
Let's pit the planet against the poor.
Who wins? The planet.
Okay. You don't love the poor that much.
Do you love the planet or
do you hate capitalism?
Let's pit those two
things against each other.
Oh, well it turns out we
actually hate capitalism.
How can we tell?
Because you're willing to break it.
And you know what's gonna happen.
So what's gonna happen in Sri Lanka
with these 20 million people
who now have nothing to eat?
Are they gonna eat all the animals?
Are they gonna burn all the firewood.
Their stockpiling firewood in Germany.
It's like so is your
environmental globalist utopia
gonna kill the poor
and destroy the planet?
And that's okay 'cause
we'll wipe out capitalism.
It's like okay.
- Yeah.
The dragon and the fear of
the dragon drives ideologies,
some of which can build a better world,
some of which can destroy that world.
- Now, what do you think of that theory
about trustworthiness?
If the dragon that you're facing
turns you into a terrified tyrant.
You're not the man for the job.
Is that a good theory?
- It's an interesting theory.
Let me use that theory.
It's a challenge because
what does terror look like?
Let me table the turns.
Turn the tables on you.
You are
terrified, afraid,
concerned about the dragon
of something we can
call communism, Marxism.
- Am i terrified of it?
Not terrified enough to be a tyrant.
- Your theories had two components.
- [Jordan] Yeah. I'm not paralyzed.
- It had a dragon.
- Yeah. I'm not paralyzed
and I don't want to be a tyrant.
- The tyrant part I think
is missing with you,
but you are very concerned.
The intensity of your feeling
does not give much space, actually,
at least in your public persona
for sitting quietly with the dragon
and sipping a couple of beers
and thinking about this thing.
The intensity of your anger,
concern about certain things
you're seeing in society.
Is that going to drive you off the path
that ultimately takes us to better world?
- That's a good question.
I mean, I'm trying to get that right.
So we've kind of come
to a cultural conclusion
about the Nazis.
Do you get to be angry about the Nazis?
Seems the answer to that is yes.
- Well actually let me push back here.
I also don't trust people who
are angry about the Nazis.
- [Jordan] Fair. I mean the actual Nazis.
- Well,
as you know, there's a
lot of people in the world
that use actual Nazis
to mean a lot of things.
- I know, I know.
- One of them
is very important to Me.
- Me for example.
- Well, yes.
- He's a Nazi, or magical
super Nazi as it turns out.
- I think to actually sort of steel man
all their perspectives,
I think a lot of people that
call you a Nazi mean it.
So-
- Yeah.
I'm aware of that.
- There's an important thing there though,
because I went to the front in Ukraine.
- Yeah.
- And a lot of the people
that lost their home or they're kind of,
that got to interact a lot
with the Russian soldiers,
Ukrainian people that interacted
with the Russian soldiers,
they reported that the Russian soldiers
really believe they're saving the people
of Ukraine in these local
villages from the Nazis.
- I understand. Yeah.
- So to them,
it's not just that the
Ukraine government has,
or Ukraine has some Nazis.
It's like, it has been,
the idea is that the Nazis
have taken over Ukraine
and we need to free them.
This is the belief.
- Yeah.
- So again, Nazi is still
a dragon that lives.
- Yeah.
- And it's used by people
because it's safe to
sit next to that dragon
and spread any kind of ideology you want.
So I just wanna kind of
say that we have agreed
on this particular dragon,
but I still don't trust
anybody who uses that word.
- Yeah, well, we have issues
with boundaries, right?
No, no.
(Lex chuckles)
So this is a very
complicated problem. Right?
So Rene Girard believed that
it was of human proclivity
to demonize the scapegoat
and then drive it out of the village.
And I've thought about that a lot.
We need a place to put
Satan, like seriously,
this is a serious issue.
- [Lex] Should he be inside
the village or outside?
- Well, maybe he should be inside you.
Right?
That's the fundamental essence
of the Christian doctrine.
It's like Satan is best
fought on the battleground
of your soul.
And that's, it's right.
It's right.
- Can you actually put
words to the kind of dragon
that you're fighting?
Is it communism?
- It's the spirit of Cain.
Yeah.
- [Lex] Can you elaborate?
- Well.
- What the spirit of Cain is?
- So after Adam and Eve
are thrown out of paradise
for becoming self-conscious
or when they become self-conscious,
they're destined to work.
And the reason for that
as far as I can tell
is that to become self-conscious
is to become aware of the future.
It's to become aware of death.
That certainly happens in
the Adam and Eve story.
To have the scales fall from your eyes.
And then the consequence of that is
that you now have to labor
to prevent the catastrophes of the future.
That's work. Work is sacrifice.
Sacrifice of the present to the future.
It's delay of gratification.
It's maturity.
It's sacrificed to something as well
and in the spirit of something.
Okay. So now Adam and
Eve have two children.
Cain and Abel.
So those are the first
two people in history
because the Garden of Eden doesn't count.
And they're the first
two people who are born
rather than created so
they're the first two people.
And that's a hell of a
story because it's a story
of fratricidal murder that
degenerates into genocide,
flood and tyranny.
So that's fun for the opening
salvo of the story let's say.
And Abel and Cain both make sacrifices.
And for some reason Abel
sacrifices, please God,
it's not exactly clear why.
And Cains don't.
Now there's an implication in the text
that it's because Cain's
sacrifices are second rate.
God says that Abel brings the finest
to the sacrificial altar.
He doesn't say that about Cain.
So you could imagine that
Cain is sacrificing away,
but he's holding something in reserve.
He's not all in, he's not
bringing his best to the table.
He's not offering his best to God.
And so Abel thrives like mad.
And everyone loves him.
And he gets exactly
what he needs and wants
exactly when he needs and wants it.
He's favored of God.
And Cain is bearing this
terrible burden forward
and working and his
sacrifices are rejected.
So he gets resentful, really resentful,
resentful enough to call God
out and say something like
this is quite the creation
you've got going here.
I'm breaking myself in half
and nothing good's coming my way.
What the hell's up with that?
And then there's Abel, the
sun's shining on him every day.
How dare you?
It's like, okay, but this is
God that Cain's talking to you.
And so God says what
Cain least wants to hear,
which is what God usually says to people.
He says, "Look to your own devices.
You're not making the
sacrifices you should.
And you know it."
And then he says something even worse.
He says, "Sin crouches at your door,
like a sexually aroused predatory animal.
And you've invited it in to have your way,
to have its way with you."
And so he basically says,
you have allowed your
resentment to preoccupy yourself
and now you're brooding upon it
and generating something creative, new,
and awful possessed by
the spirit of resentment.
And that's why you're in the
miserable state you're in.
So then Cain leaves,
his countenance falls,
as you might expect, and Cain leaves.
And he's so incensed by
this because God has said,
"Look, your problems
are of your own making.
And not only that you invited them in
and not only that you
engaged in this creatively
and not only that you're blaming it on me
and not only that that's
making you jealous of Abel
who's your actual idol and goal."
And Cain instead of changing, kills Abel.
Right?
And then Cain's descendants
are the first people
who make weapons of war.
And so that's, okay, you
wanna know what I think?
That's the eternal story of mankind.
And it's playing out right now,
except at a thousand times the rate.
- Can I present to you a difficult truth?
Perhaps not a truth, but a thought I have
that it is not always easy to know
which among us are the Cain.
- That's for sure.
- And resentment,
it is possible to
imagine you as the person
who has a resentment towards
a particular worldview
that you really worry about.
- Yeah, well, I talked
to a good friend of mine
last week about that publicly.
We'll release it.
'Cause I said, well,
do I have a particular
animus against the left?
Let's say. It's like, well probably.
Okay. Why?
Well, first of all, I'm
a university professor.
It's not like the universities
are threatened by the right.
They're threatened by the left 100%.
And they're not just
threatened a little bit.
They're threatened a lot.
And that threat made it
impossible for me to continue
in my profession the way I was.
And it cost me my clinical practice too.
And that's not over yet
because I have 10 lawsuits
against me out right now from
the College of Psychologists,
because they've allowed
anyone to complain about me
anywhere in the world for any reason,
and have the choice to follow
that up with an investigation,
which is a punishment in and
of itself and are doing so.
And then I've been
tortured nearly to death
multiple times by bad actors on the left.
Now I've had my fair share
of radical right wingers
being unhappy with what I've said,
but personally it's been
the left the whole time.
Not only me, but my family,
put my family at risk in a big way.
And constantly, like not once or twice,
'cause many people get
canceled once or twice,
but I've been canceled like 40 times.
And I know like 200 people
now who've been canceled
and I can tell you without doubt
that it is one of the worst
experiences of their life
and that's if it only happens once.
And so,
and then I also know that the communists
killed 100 million people
in the 20th century,
that the intellectuals
excused them for it nonstop
and still haven't quit, that
almost no one knows about it.
And that the specter of resentful Marxism
is back in full force.
And so do I have a bit of
an animus against that?
Yes.
Does it go too far?
I don't know.
I'm trying to figure that out.
- The story you just told
it seems nearly impossible
for you, an intellectual powerhouse,
not to have a tremendous
amount of resentment.
- Well.
- So let me challenge you.
- Yeah. Go right ahead.
- Let me challenge you. Can you steel man?
The case that the prime
minister of this country,
Trudeau, wants the best for this country
and actually might do good
things for this country.
As an intellectual challenge.
- Sure.
He seems to get along well with his wife.
He has some kids.
There's no sexual scandals
and he's in a position where
that could easily be the case.
He seems to have done some good things
on the oceanic management front.
He's put a fair bit of Canada's oceans
into marine protected areas,
and that might be his most
fundamental legacy if it's real.
I've been trying to get information about
the actual reality of the protection.
And I haven't been able to do that,
but that's a good thing.
- So sorry, the family thing is
there's some aspect-
- Speaks to his character.
- His character, there
is some aspect to him
that makes him a good man
in that sense.
- Well, I mean,
there's the evidence there, you know?
I mean he's not a Jeffrey
Epstein profligate
on the sexual front, so that's something.
And his wife,
they seem to have a real
marriage and he has kids.
So good for him.
- [Lex] That's a good start
by the way for a leader.
- Yeah. Right.
- To be a good man.
- Well then I also thought, okay, well,
after the liberals had brought
in a Harvard intellectual
who was a Canadian to
be their last leader,
he didn't work out and then
they're flailing a boat
for a leader and the liberals in Canada
are pretty good at maintaining
power and leadership
and have been the dominant governing party
in Canada for a long time.
And so they went to Justin and said,
"Well, you know, it's
you or a conservative."
And you can imagine that's
not a positive specter
for someone who's on the
left or even a liberal.
And Trudeau is quite a bit on the left.
And they said," We need you to run."
And then I thought, okay,
well the answer to that
should have been no
because the Trudeau, Justin
has no training for this,
no experience.
He's not.
He's a part-time drama
teacher fundamentally.
He hadn't run a business.
He just didn't know enough
to be prime minister.
But then I'm trying to put
myself in his position.
So it's like, okay, I don't know enough,
but I'm young and we don't
want the conservatives.
And they had had a run, a 10 year run
so maybe it was time for new government.
Maybe I could grow into this man.
Maybe I could surround
myself with good people
and I could learn,
humbly, and I could become
the person I'm now pretending to be,
which we all have to do
as we move forward, right?
And so then I thought, okay,
I think you made a mistake there
'cause you ran only on your father's name
and you didn't have the background,
but let's give the devil his
due and say that's no problem.
Okay. So now what do you do?
Well, you get elected.
And your first act is to
make the cabinet 50% women
despite the fact that only 25%
of the elected members are female.
It's like, okay, you just
halved your talent pool.
That was a really bad
move for your first move.
- Can I ask you about that?
- Yeah.
- Do you think,
where does that move come from?
Deep somewhere in the heart
or is it trying to listen
to the social forces of the moment
and try to ride those ways towards
maybe greater popularity.
- You don't make a decision
like that after thinking it through.
It's like, no, you just
halved your talent pool
for cabinet positions.
That's what you did. There's
enough cabinet positions.
You know, you could argue that
each of them met threshold,
it's like there's a big difference
between threshold and excellent.
- So you don't think that came
from a place of compassion?
- I don't care if it did.
I don't regard compassion as a virtue.
Compassion is a reflex, not a virtue.
- You don't think-
- Judicious compassion
is a virtue.
- Wait, wait a minute, wait a minute.
Compassion can come deep
from the human heart
and the human mind I think.
Are we talking about the
same kind of compassion?
- Yes.
- Trying to understand
the suffering-
- Treating adults like infants
is not virtuous.
- I see.
Well, compassion isn't
treating adult like infants,
I mean, those are just terms.
- Are you sure?
- Okay.
Whatever the term is, love is
maybe the better word.
- Eatable compassion is.
- I mean, I suppose I'm speaking to love.
You don't think those
ideas came from concern-
- Love is compassion.
- You don't think love is-
- Love is a blend
of compassion and encouragement and truth.
Love is complicated, man.
- [Lex] Yeah, it has a lot
of good things in it, yeah.
- If I love you,
is it compassion or
encouragement you want from me?
- Yeah. The dance.
Love is definitely a dance of two humans
ultimately that leads to
the growth of both, yes.
- Well, that's the thing.
The growth element is crucial.
Because the growth element,
to foster the growth element
that requires judgment.
Compassion and judgment
have been conceptualized this way forever.
Two hands of God, mercy and justice.
They have to operate in tandem. Right?
And mercy is
flawed as you are, you're acceptable.
It's like, well, do you want that?
Do you want your flaws to be acceptable?
And the answer that is no.
So it's like, well, that's
where the judgment comes in.
It's like, but you could be better.
You could be more than you are.
And that's the maternal and the paternal
in some fundamental sense.
And there has to be a active
exchange of information
between those two polls.
So even if Trudeau was
motivated by compassion
and it's like, yeah,
just how loving are you?
First of all.
No, it was a really bad decision.
And he's expressed contempt
for monetary policy.
I'm not interested in monetary policy.
It's like, okay, but
you're a prime minister.
And he's expressed admiration
for the Chinese Communist Party
because they can be very efficient
in their pursuit of environmental goals.
It's like, oh yeah, efficiency, ay?
The efficiency of the tyranny
in the service of your terror.
And I've watched him repeatedly
and I've listened to him a lot
and I've tried to do that clinically
and with some degree of dispassion.
And that's hard too
because his father Pierre
devastated the West in 1982
with the national energy policy.
And Trudeau is doing exactly
the same thing again.
And so as a Westerner as well,
I have an inbuilt animus
and one that's well deserved
because central Canada,
especially the glittery literary
elite types in the Ottawa,
Montreal, Toronto triangle
have exploited the West and
expressed contempt for the West
far too much for far too long.
And that's accelerating at
the moment, for example,
with Trudeau's recent attack
on the Canadian farmers.
He's an enemy of the oil and gas industry,
which is an utter and
absolute bloody catastrophe.
And look what's happened in Europe,
at least in partial consequence.
And he's no friend to the farmers.
So I've tried to steel man him. You know?
I try to put myself in
the position of the people
that I'm criticizing.
I think he's a narcissist.
- Do you think there's a degree
to which power changed him?
- If you're not suited for the position,
if you're not the man for the position,
you can be absolutely 100% sure
that the power will corrupt you.
How could it not?
I mean, at the least,
if you don't have the chops for the job,
you have to devalue the job to the point
where you can feel
comfortable inhabiting it.
So yes, I think that it's corrupted him
and I mean, look at him, doubling down.
We wear masks in flights into Canada.
We have to fill out an
ArriveCAN bureaucratic form
on our phones because a
passport isn't good enough.
We can't get a passport.
What if you're 85
and you don't know how
to use a smartphone?
Oh, well. Too bad for you.
- Yeah.
- It's like, yes, it's corrupted him.
- Would you talk to him?
If you were to sit down and talk with him
and he wanted to talk,
would you, and what kind
of things would you about
perhaps on your podcast?
- I don't think I've ever
said no to talking to anyone.
So which is, you know-
(Lex chuckles)
- Would that be a first or would
you make that conversation?
Do you believe in the
power of conversation-
- No. I'd ask him.
- In those kinds of context?
- No, if he was willing
to talk to me, I'd talk,
'cause I'd like to ask him,
I have lots of things I'd
like to ask him about.
I mean, I've had political
types in Canada on my podcast
and tried to ask them questions
to so I'd like to know.
Maybe I've got a big part of him wrong.
- Yes.
- And I probably do.
But my observation is being that
every chance he had to retreat
from his pharonic position,
let's say, he doubled down.
And our parliament is not
running for the next year.
It's still Zoom in.
It's still COVID lockdown
parliament for the next year.
It's already been fatally compromised
perhaps by the lockdowns for
the last couple of years.
And this is Parliament
we're talking about.
- Yeah, there's a kind
paralysis, fear driven
paralysis that also in part,
some of the most brilliant people I know
are lost in this paralysis.
I don't think people have
assigned a word to it,
but it's almost like a
fear of this unknown thing
that lurks in the shadows.
And unfortunately, that fear is leveraged
by people that
who are in academic circles,
who are in faculty or students and so on
and more administration and
they start to use that fear,
which makes me quite uncomfortable.
It does lend people in
the positions of power
who are not good at handling that power
to become slowly,
day by day, a little bit more corrupt.
- I was really trying
to figure out, you know,
the last two weeks thinking this through,
it's like how do you know?
Let's say someone asked me a question
in the YouTube comment, he said, "Well,
why can I trust your advice
on the environmental front?"
And I thought that's a
really good question.
Okay.
Let's see if we can
figure out the principles
by which the advice would be trustworthy.
Okay. How do you know
it's not trustworthy?
Well, one potential response to that
would be the claims are not
in accordance with the facts,
but facts are tricky things
and it depends on where you look for them.
So that's a tough one to get right,
because for example, Lomborg's
fundamental critics argue
about his facts, not just
his interpretation of them.
So that can't be an unerring guide.
And so I thought, well, the
facts exactly doesn't work
'cause when it's about everything,
there's too many facts.
So then how do you determine if someone's
a trustworthy guide in the face
of the apocalyptic unknown?
'Cause that's really the question.
And the answer is they're
not terrified tyrants.
I think that's the answer.
Now maybe that's wrong. If
someone has a better answer, hey.
- [Lex] How do you know if
they're terrified tyrant?
- Because they are
willing to use compulsion
on other people when
they could use goodwill.
Like the farmers in Canada
objected, they said, "Look,
we have every economic reason
to use as little fertilizer as we can
'cause it's expensive.
We have satellite maps of
where we put the fertilizer.
We have cut our fertilizer use
so substantially in the last
40 years you can't believe it.
And we grow way more food.
We're already breaking ourselves in half.
And if you know farmers,
especially the ones who still survive,
you think those people don't
know what they're doing.
It's like they're pretty
damn sophisticated, man.
Like way more sophisticated
than our prime minister.
And now you tell them,
no, it's a 30% reduction
and we don't care how
much food you're growing.
So it's not a reduction that's dependent
on amount of food produced
per unit of fertilizer used,
which would be, at least
you could imagine it.
Okay, so you're producing this much food
and use this much fertilizer
so you're hyper efficient.
Maybe we take the 10% of farmers
who are the least efficient
in that metric and we say to them,
you have to get as efficient
as the average farmer.
And then they say, "Well look,
our situation's different.
We're in a more Northern climb.
The soil's weaker."
You obviously have to bargain with that,
but at least you reward
them for their productivity.
Well it's like, well, Holland
isn't gonna have beef.
Well where are they gonna get it?
Well, you don't need it.
It's like, oh I see.
You get to tell me what
I can eat now, do you?
Really? Okay.
And Holland is gonna
import food from where
that's more efficient
on the fertilizer front?
There's no one more
efficient than Holland.
And same with Canada.
And like isn't this gonna make
food prices more expensive?
And doesn't that mean
that hungry people die?
'Cause that is what it means.
- Ultimately poor people pay the price
of these kinds of policies.
- Not known, not ultimately.
Now.
- Today.
- Today, that's a crucial
distinction because they say
well, ultimately the poor will benefit.
Yeah. Except the dead ones.
- Yes. Today.
- Today. Right?
- It seems like the story of war too
is a time when the poor people suffer
from the decision made by the powerful,
the rich, the political elite.
- Yeah,
'cause they can just leave.
- Yeah.
Let me ask you about the war in Ukraine.
- Oh yeah. I got into plenty
of trouble about that too.
- You're just a man in a suit
talking on microphones and
writing brilliant articles.
There's also people dying, fighting.
It's their land. It's their country.
It's their history.
This is true for both Russia and Ukraine.
- Yep.
- It's people trying to ask,
they have many dragons and
they're asking themselves
a question, who are we?
- That's for sure.
- What is this?
What is the future of this nation?
We thought we are a great nation.
And I think both countries
say this and they say,
well, how do we become the
great nation we thought we are?
- Yeah.
- And so what,
first of all, you got in trouble.
What the dynamics of the trouble?
And is something you regret saying?
- No. No, no. I thought about it a lot.
I laid out four reasons for the war.
And then I was criticized
in "The Atlantic,"
the argument was reduced to one reason,
which was a caricature of the reason.
I gave a variety of reasons
why the war happened,
mismanagement on the part of the West
in relationship to
Russia and foreign policy
since the wall fell.
It's understandable 'cause
it's extremely complex.
Hyper reliance on Russia
as a Cardinal source of
energy provision for Europe
in the wake of idiot environmental
globalist utopianism,
the expansionist tendencies of Russia
that are analogous in some sense
to the Soviet Union Empire building.
And then the last one,
which is the one I got in trouble for,
which is Putin's belief
or willingness to manipulate his people
into believing that
Russia is a salvific force
in the face of idiot Western wokeism.
And that's the one I got in trouble for.
It's like, "Well, you're
justifying Putin,"
it's like...
It's not only the Russians that think
the West has lost its mind.
The Eastern Europeans think so too.
And do I know that?
It's like, well,
I went to 15 Eastern European
countries this spring
and I talked to 300 political
and cultural leaders.
And you might say, "Well,
they were all conservatives.
It's just like actually no they weren't.
Most of them were conservatives
'cause it turns out that they're
more willing to talk to me,
but a good chunk of them were liberals
by any stretch of the imagination
and a fair number of them
were canceled progressives.
- Well, because you're very
concerned about the culture wars
that perhaps are a signal
of a possible bad future
for this country and for
this part of the world,
that reason stands out.
And
do you sort of looking
back at four reasons
think it deserves to have
a place in one of the four?
- Oh absolutely.
- Because it is, you know-
- Well the four was
bifurcated, eh, because I said,
"Look, Putin might believe this."
And I actually think he does
'cause I read a bunch of Putin speeches
and I have been reading them for 15 years
and my sense of people generally,
and this was true of Hitler,
it's like, well, what did Hitler believe?
Well, did you read what he wrote?
He just did what he
said he was going to do.
And you might think, well,
some people are so tricky
they have a whole body
of elaborated speech
that's completely separate
from their personality,
and their personality is
pursuing a different agenda
and this whole body of speech
is nothing but affront.
- Yeah.
- It's like good luck
finding someone that sophisticated,
first of all, if you
say things long enough,
you're gonna believe them.
- That's a really
interesting and fascinating
and important point.
Even if you start out as
a lie, as a propaganda,
I think Hitler is an example of somebody
that I think really quickly
you start to believe the propaganda.
- Well-
- It's really interesting.
You've thought a lot about AI systems.
It's like don't you
become what you practice?
And the answer to that
is, well, absolutely.
We even know the neurology.
It's like when you first
formulate a concept,
huge swaths of your cortex
are lit up so to speak.
But as you practice that, first of all,
the right hemisphere stops participating.
And then the left
participates less and less
until you build specialized machinery
for exactly that conceptual frame.
And then you start to see
it, not just think it.
And so if you're telling
the same lies over and over,
who do you think you're fooling?
Think, well, I can withstand my own lies.
Not if they're effective lies.
And if they're effective enough
to fool millions of people
and then they reflect them back to you,
what makes you think
you're going to be able
to withstand that?
You aren't.
And so I do think Putin believes
to the degree that he believes anything.
I do believe that he thinks
of himself as a ballwork
for Christendom against the
degeneration of the West.
And that's that third
way that Dugin and Putin
have been talking about,
the philosopher Alexander
Dugin and Putin for 15 years.
Now, what that is is very amorphous.
Solzhenitsyn thought the
Russians would have to return
to the incremental development
of Orthodox Christianity
to escape from the communist trap.
And to some degree that's
happened in Russia,
'cause there's been a return
to Orthodox Christianity.
Now you could say, yeah,
but the Orthodox church
has just been co-opted by the state.
And I would say there's
some evidence for that.
I've heard for example,
that the metropolitan owns,
now, I don't know if this is true,
owns $5 billion worth
of personal property.
And I would say there's a
bit of a moral hazard in that
and it's possible that the Orthodox church
has been co-opted, but
there has been somewhat
of an Orthodox revival in Russia
and I don't think that's all bad.
Now, even if Putin doesn't
believe any of this,
if he's just a manipulator,
and unfortunately I
don't think that's true.
I've read his speeches. It
doesn't look like it to me.
And he is by no means
the worst Russian leader
of the last 100 years.
- [Lex] Well, there's
quite a selection there.
- There certainly is, but,
and I say that knowing that.
Even if he doesn't believe it,
he's convinced his people that it's true.
And so we're stuck with
the claim in either case.
And that's the point I was
trying to make in the article.
- Sometimes I'm troubled by
people that explain things
and a lot of people
have reached out to me,
experts telling me how I should feel,
what I should think about Ukraine.
Oh, you naive, Lex, you're so naive.
You know, here's how it really is.
But then I get to see
people that lost their home.
I get to see people on the
Russian side who believe they're,
I genuinely think that there's some degree
to which they have love in their heart,
they see themselves as heroes
saving a land from Nazis.
- How else would you motivate
young men to go fight?
- It's just it's these humans destroying
not only their homes, but
creating generational hate
destroying the possibility
of love towards each other.
They're basically creating hate.
What I've heard a lot of is
on February 24th of this year,
hate was born at a scale
that region has not seen.
Hate towards not Vladimir Putin,
hate towards not the soldiers in Russia,
but hates towards all Russians.
Hate that will last generations.
And then you could see
just the pain there.
And then when all these experts talk about
agriculture and energy
and geopolitics and yeah,
maybe like what you say with
the fighting the ideologies
of the woke and so on,
I just feel like it's
missing something deep.
That war is not fought
about any of those things.
War is started and war is averted
based on human beings based on humanity.
- Well here's another ugly thought
since we haven't had enough so far.
We locked everything down for COVID.
How much face to face
communication was there
between the West and Vladimir Putin?
How about none?
- Yeah.
- How about that was the wrong amount?
Especially given that Europe
was completely dependent
on Putin for its energy supplies.
Well, not completely,
but you know what I mean,
materially insignificantly.
So maybe had to go talk to
him once every six months.
Maybe he's in a bit of a bubble.
Probably.
- And not just an information bubble
how all these experts tell me about.
- Yeah, no, a human bubble.
- Human bubble. You bet, man.
Look, one of the things
I've really learned,
there's a real emphasis on
hospitality in the Old Testament.
I just brought all these scholars together
to talk about Exodus.
I have this security team with me
and they're tough military guys,
but they're on board for
this mission, let's say.
And so they went outta their way
to be hospitable to my academic guests.
They laid out nice platters of
meat and cheese and crackers.
They spent all day preparing
this house I had rented
so that we could have a hospitable
time with these scholars.
Most of whom I didn't know well,
but who said they would
come and spend eight days
talking about this book with me.
We rented some jet skis.
We had a nice house.
We had fun and we got to know each other
and we got to trust each other
because we could see that
we could have some fun
and that we could let our hair down a bit.
We didn't have to be on guard.
And that made the talks way deeper.
And then we found out we
couldn't get through Exodus
in eight days and so I
had proposed very early on
that we're gonna double the length.
And so I pulled eight
people out of their lives
for eight days.
That's not an easy thing to do.
It's also quite expensive
and the DailyWire+
people picked all that up
and they said yes right away.
Said, "We'd love to do this again."
Well, why?
Well, partly because it was,
intellectually it was
unbelievably engaging.
I learned so much.
It'll take me like a year to digest it
if I can ever digest it.
But they had a really good time.
And so when they were
offered that combination
of intellectual challenge,
let's say in hospitality,
it was a no brainer.
They just said, every one of them said,
if I can do it in any way,
I will definitely be there.
And I went to Washington a bunch of times
and the culture of hospitality
has broken down in Washington.
40% of congressmen sleep in their offices.
They don't have apartments.
Their family isn't there with them.
They don't have social occasions
with their fellow
Democrats or Republicans,
much less across the table.
And I tried to have some
meetings in Washington
that were bilateral a couple of times,
get young Republican congressmen
and Democrats together to talk.
And as soon as they
talk, they think, oh...
It was so interesting
'cause one of the lunches
was about 15 people,
half Democrats and half Republicans.
And all I'd asked them to do
was just spend three minutes
talking about why you decided
to become a Congressman,
which is not a job I
would take by the way.
You spend 25 hours a week
fundraising on the telephone.
Your family isn't there with you.
You have to run for
reelection every two years.
You're beholden to the
party apparatus, right?
You're vilified constantly.
This is not, you know, people think,
well this is a job for the privileged.
It's like, yeah, you
go and run for Congress
and find out how much fun it is
and put your family on the line
and then have to beg for
your job every two years
while your enemies, the
worst of your enemies
and the worst of your friends
are viciously henpecking you.
And so anyways, we had them
all sit around a table,
and said, okay, just say
why you ran for Congress.
It was so cool, especially for a Canadian
'cause you Americans you're
so bloody theatrical.
It's something to watch.
It was like "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington"
for every one of them.
It's like, well, this
country's given us so much.
We've benefited so much
from our time here,
we think this is a wonderful country.
We really felt that we should give back.
Then the next one would talk
and it was like exactly the same story.
And then it didn't matter
if they were a Republican or Democrat.
You couldn't tell the difference.
No one could. And was it genuine?
It's like, well, are you genuine?
You think these people are worse than you?
First of all, they're not.
Second of all. They're probably better.
All things considered.
It's not that easy to
become a Congressman.
And I'm sure there's some
bad apples in the bunch,
but by and large,
you walk away from your
meetings with these people
and you think
pretty impressive.
- They really are giving
a part of themselves
in the name of service.
Maybe over time they become cynical
and become jaded and worn
down by the whole system.
But I think a lot of it-
- Would you imagine that.
- Is healed, I think.
And I don't think I'm,
well, I'm in part naive,
but not fully, that a lot of it is healed
through the power of conversation.
Just basic social interaction.
I do think that the-
- You bet, man.
- The effects of this pandemic-
- Especially by listening.
- Listening,
just sitting there and
it doesn't have to be
talking about the actual issue,
it's actually humor
and all those kinds of things
about personal struggles,
all those kinds of things that remind you
that you're all just humans.
- Yeah, well the great
leaders that I've met,
and I've met some now,
they go listen to their constituents.
It's not a policy discussion.
It's not an ideology discussion.
They go say, okay,
what's your life like?
And what are your problems?
And tell me about them.
And then they listen and
then they're struck by them.
And then they gather up all that misery
and they bring it to the
congressional officer
to the parliament and they think
here's what the people are crying out for.
And the good leaders, that's
a leader, leader listens.
It's like I talked to
Jimmy Carr about comedy.
And he's sold out stages
worldwide on a tour being funny.
That's hard.
He said comedy is the
most, standup comedy,
which is what I do in some real sense.
It's a thing I do that it's the most akin
to what I'm doing on my
book tours I would say.
It's the closest analog.
He said, "It's the most
dialogical enterprise."
And I thought, well,
why, what do you mean?
Cause see, it's just a monologue.
And it's a prepared monologue.
I mean, you have to interact
dynamically with the audience
while you're telling your jokes
and you gotta get the timing right,
but you have a body of jokes.
He said, "Well, here's how
you prepare the jokes."
And I've been told this
by other comedians.
"You go to 50 clubs
before you go on your tour
and you go some new material
and you think it's funny,
and you go into a club and
you lay out your new material
and people laugh at some of it.
And you pay attention
to what they laugh at
and what they don't laugh at.
So you subject yourself to
the judgment of the crowd
and you get rid of
everything that isn't funny.
And if you do that enough,
even if you're not that funny,
the crowd will tell you what's funny.
So you can imagine,
imagine you do 50 shows
and each is an hour long
and you collect two minutes
of humor from each show.
So you throw away 90,
you throw away two hours,
more than 98% of it.
Collect two minutes per show.
So you're not very funny at all.
You're like funny 2% of the time.
You aggregate that, man, you're a scream.
And so that's what a leader does is,
that is what a leader does is goes out
and he aggregates the misery, you know?
And the hopes.
And then I do think that's revivifying
to someone who would
otherwise be cynical and jaded
because then the person
can say to themselves,
despite the inadequacies of
the system and my inadequacies,
I'm gathering up the misery and the hope
and I'm bringing it forward
where it can be redressed.
- Giving it a voice.
- Yep. That's right.
Giving it a voice.
- Can you actually take me through a day
'cause this is fascinating
through your comedy tour.
What does a day in the life
of Jordan Peterson look like?
Which is this very interesting day.
Let's look at the day
when you have to speak.
- Mm-hmm.
- Preparing your mind,
thinking of what you're
going to talk about.
Preparing yourself physically and mentally
to interact with the crowd
through the actual speaking,
how do you adjust what
you're thinking through
and how do you come down from that
so you can start all again as
a limited biological system?
- Well, I'm usually up by 7:00
and ready to go by 7:30 or 8:00.
- Coffee?
- No.
- Nothing.
- Steak and water.
- [Lex] How many times a day, steak?
- That's all I eat.
- How many times?
- Three or four depending on the day.
- Steak and water.
- Steak and sparkling water.
Yeah. So monastic aestheticism, man.
(Lex laughing)
- Well, I did the proper,
I usually just once a day,
I did the proper Jordan
Peterson last night
and just ate two steaks.
- And how was that?
- Was wonderful.
- Yeah, well, if you have
to only eat one thing,
you know, could be worse.
So anyways, I'm ready to go at 8:00
because we're generally moving.
- [Lex] What does it moving
mean? You're constantly-
- Flying somewhere.
- Okay.
- And we usually use private flights now
because the commercial
airlines aren't reliable enough
and you cannot not make a venue.
Right. So that's rule
number one on a tour.
You make the show.
- Yeah.
- And then rule number two is
anybody who causes any
trouble on the tour is gone
because there is zero room for error.
No, there's zero room for
unnecessary unaddressed error,
'cause there's gonna be errors.
The guys I have around me
now, if they make a mistake,
they fix it right away.
And that's great.
- There's a lot of people
relying on you to be there
so you have to be there.
- Yeah.
Like 4,000 people typically.
- Yeah.
- So then
I'm on the plane and I usually write
or often because there's
no internet on the plane
and that's a good use of time.
So I'm writing a new book.
So I write on the plane.
- Typing or handwriting?
- Typing.
- Yeah. Typing.
And then we land and we go to,
it's usually early afternoon
by then, we go to a hotel.
It's usually a nice hotel
that's not corporate.
I don't really like corporate hotels.
My secretary and one of my logistics guys
has got quite good at picking
kind of adventurous hotels,
boutique hotels.
They're usually in the
old parts of the city,
especially in Europe,
somewhere interesting.
And so we go there and then lunch usually,
and sometimes that's an air fryer
and a steak in the hotel room
and I leave a trail of
air fryers behind me
all across the world.
And then Tammy and I usually
go out and have a walk
or something and take a look at the city.
And then I have a rest for
like an hour and a half
or an hour, half an hour.
- Like a nap?
- Yeah, a nap.
I have to sleep for 20 minutes
and that's about all I can sleep,
but I need to do that
in the late afternoon.
- [Lex] And that refreshes your mind?
- Yep. That wakes me up
again for the evening.
And then Tam has to sleep longer.
She's still recovering from her illness
and so she has to sleep
longer in the afternoon,
and that's absolutely
necessary for both of us
or things start to get frayed.
And so then we go to the venue
and then I usually sit for
an hour if I'm gonna lecture.
I've been doing a lot of Q and As,
and that's a little easier,
but if I'm gonna lecture,
I have to sit for an hour.
And then I think, okay,
what question am I trying to investigate?
I have to have that, so that's the point.
What mystery am I trying to unravel?
It's usually associated with
one of the rules in my book
because technically it's a book tour,
but each of those rules is an
investigation into an ethic
and each of them points to
a deeper sort of mystery
in some sense.
And there's no end to the
amount it can be explored.
And so I have the question/
The question might be something like
put your house in perfect order
before you criticize the world.
Okay. What does that mean exactly?
What does house mean?
What does put mean, that active verb?
What does perfect and order mean?
Why before you criticize the world?
What does it mean to criticize?
What does it mean to criticize the world?
How can you do that
properly or improperly?
So I start to think about how
to decompose the question.
- And you start to think
which of these decompositions
are important to really dig into?
- Yeah, well then they'll strike me.
It's like, okay, there's something there
that I've been maybe noodling around on
that I would like to investigate further.
Then I think, okay, how can
I approach this problem?
I think, well, I have
this story that I know
and I have this story
and I have this story,
but I haven't juxtaposed them before.
And there's gonna be some
interesting interaction
in the juxtaposition.
So I have the question and
I kind have a framework
of interpretation and
then I have some potential
narrative places I can go.
And then I think, okay,
I can go juggle that and see what happens.
And so then what I want to do
is concentrate on that process
while attending to the audience,
to make sure that the words are landing
and then see if I can
delve into it deeply enough
so that a narrative emerges
spontaneously with an ending.
Now I'm sure you've experienced
this in podcasts, right?
Maybe I'm wrong, but
my experience is being,
if I fall into the conversation
and we know about the timeframe,
there'll be a natural narrative arc.
So you'll kind of know
when the midpoint is,
and you'll kind of see when
you're reaching a conclusion
and then if you really pay attention,
you can see that's a good place to stop.
And it's kind of you come to a point
and you have to be alert
and patient to see that.
And you have to be willing to be satisfied
with where you've got to.
But if you do that and
then it's like a comedian
making the punchline work, it's like
I've got all these balls in the air
and they're going somewhere
and this is how they come together.
And people love that, right?
To say, oh, this and
this and this and this
and this whack together.
And that's an insight and it
is very much like a punchline.
- Well, that's interesting
because your mind actually,
I'm fan of your podcast too,
and you are always driving towards that.
I would say for me in
a podcast conversation,
there's often a kind of
"Alice in Wonderland"
type of exploration.
- Mm-hmm.
Down the rabbit hole of man.
- And then a new thing pops up.
The more absurd, the wilder the better.
- Yeah.
- Conversations with Elon
are like this.
- Yeah. I bet.
- It's like actually the more
you drive towards an arc,
the more uncomfortable you start to get
in a fun, absurd conversation because, oh,
I'm now one of the normies.
No, I don't want that.
I want to be, I want the
rabbit, I want the crazy,
because it makes it more fun.
But somehow throughout it,
there is wisdom that you try to grasp at
such that there is a thread to-
- Well, that's the thing, man.
You're following the thread, eh?
- Yeah. We try.
- Well, that's right.
That's what we're trying to do.
That thread, that thread
is the proper balance
between structure and spontaneity.
And it manifests itself
as the instinct of meaning
and that's the logos in a dialogos
and it really is the logos
and God only knows what that means.
You know?
I mean, the the biblical claim is
that logos is the fundamental
principle of reality.
And I think that's true.
I actually think that's true
'cause I think that that
meaning that guides you,
well, here's a way of thinking about it.
I've been writing about this recently.
What's real? (locking)
Matter. It's like,
okay, that's one answer.
What's real?
What matters is real
'cause that's how you act.
Okay. So that's different than matter.
It's like, okay, what's the
most real of what matters?
How about pain?
Why is it the most real?
Try arguing it away.
Good luck.
So pain is the fundamental reality.
All right. Well that's rough.
Doesn't that lead to
nihilism and hopelessness?
Yeah.
Doesn't it lead to a
philosophy that's antithetical
towards being the most
fundamental reality is pain?
Yes.
Is there anything more
fundamental than pain?
Love.
Really.
If you're in pain, (sobbing)
love and truth.
That's what you got.
And you know,
if they're more powerful than pain,
maybe they're the most real things.
- When you think about
reality, what is real?
That is the most real thing.
- Well, it it's a tough one, right?
Because you have to, 'cause
if you're a scientist,
a materialist think, well, (knocking)
the matter is the most real.
It's like, well, you don't
know what the matter is.
- Yeah.
- So, and then when push
comes to shove and it will,
you'll find out what's most real.
- Yeah.
I feel like this is missing.
The physical reality is
missing some of the things.
So of course pain has
a biological component
and all those kinds of
things, but it's missing
something deep about the human condition
that at least the modern
science is not able to describe,
but is it is reaching towards that.
- Yeah, it is.
- And one way to describe it
as you're describing is
the reason is reaching it
is because underneath of science
is this assumption that there's a deep-
- [Jordan] Logos.
- Thing to this whole
thing we're trying to do.
- Well, you know, there's
two traditions, right?
In some sense, there's
two logos traditions.
There's the Greek rational
enlightenment tradition.
That's a logos tradition and
it insists that there's a logos
in nature and that science
is the way to approach it.
And then there's the
Judeo-Christian logos,
which is more embodied and more spiritual.
And I would say the West
is actually an attempt
to unite those two.
And it's the proper
attempt to unite those two
because they need to be united.
And I see the union coming
near terms, you know?
I talk to Frans de Waal, for example,
about the animating principle
of chimpanzee sovereignty.
And that's pretty close biologically.
Is it power?
'Cause that's the claim even
from the biologists often.
The most dominant chimp has
the best reproductive success.
It's like, oh yeah? Dominant, hey?
You mean using compulsion?
Okay. Let's look.
Are the chimps who use
compulsion the most successful?
And the answer is sporadically and rarely.
And for short, well, that's sporadically,
for short periods of time.
Why? Because they meet an unpleasant end.
The subordinates over whom
they exercise arbitrary control
wait for a weak moment and
then tear them into shreds.
Right?
Every dictator's terror,
and for good reason.
And de Waal has showed
that the alpha chimps,
the males, who do have
preferential mat access often,
are often and reliably
the best peacemakers
and the most reciprocal.
And so even among chimps,
the principle of sovereignty
is something like iterated reciprocity.
And that's a way better
principle than power.
And it's something
like, I've been thinking
what's the antithesis
of the spirit of power?
I think it's the spirit of play.
And you know, I don't know
what you think about that,
but when you have a good
podcast conversation,
you already described it
in some sense as play.
It's like, there's a structure, right?
'Cause it's an ordered conversation,
but you want there to
be play in the system.
And if you get that right,
then it's really engaging.
And then it seems to have
its own narrative arc.
I'm not trying to impose that even on,
that's another thing I don't do.
I didn't come to this
conversation at all thinking
here's what I want out of a
conversation with Lex Fridman.
Like instrumentally, I
thought I'll go talk to Lex.
Why?
I like his podcasts.
He he's doing something right.
I don't know what it is.
He asks interesting questions.
I'll go have a conversation
with him. Where's it gonna go?
Wherever it goes.
- Embracing the spirit of play.
So you have this, when you're lecturing,
you're going in front of the crowd.
- Yeah.
- You thought of a question.
- Yeah.
- You get on the stage,
first of all, are you nervous at all?
- I'm very nervous when I'm sitting down
thinking through the structure initially,
which is why my wife and I
have been doing Q and As,
and that's easier on me.
- Yeah.
(Lex chuckling)
It's the way comedians are nervous.
Like Joe Rogan just did
his special this weekend.
And so he now has to sit
nervously like a comedian does,
which is like, I have no material now.
- Right.
- I have to start
from scratch.
- Well, that's it.
When I was doing the lectures constantly
instead of the Q and As
basically what I was doing was writing
a whole book chapter every night.
- Yeah.
- And you know,
now that's a bit of an exaggeration
'cause I would return to
themes that I had developed,
but it's not really an exaggeration
because I didn't ever just
go over wrote material ever.
So it's very demanding and
that part's nerveracking
'cause I sit down, it's an hour
before the show and I think,
can I do this?
And you know, the answer is,
well, you did it a thousand times,
but that's not this time.
- Yeah.
- It's like can I
come up with a question?
Can I think through the structure?
Can I pull off the spontaneous narrative?
Can I pull it together? And
the answer is I don't know.
And so then I get it
together in my mind, I think,
and that's hard.
It takes effort and it's nerveracking.
Okay, I got it.
But then there's the
moment you go out on stage
and you think, well, I know
I had it, but can I do it?
No notes.
- Yeah.
- And then the question is, well,
you're gonna find out while you do it.
And so then I go out on stage
and I don't talk to the audience.
I talk to one person at a time.
And you can talk to one person, you know,
'cause you know how to do that.
So I talk to a person and not too long
'cause I don't wanna
make them too nervous.
And then someone else and someone else,
and then I'm in contact with the audience.
And then I can tell if the
words are landing and I listen.
It's like are they rustling around?
Are they dead quiet?
Because you want dead quiet.
- Oh, I see 'cause that's
what focus sounds like.
You're in it together then.
- You bet.
Well, and also here's a good rule
if you're learning to speak publicly,
I never say a word till
everyone is 100% quiet.
And it's a great way to start a talk
because you're setting the frame, eh,
and if the frame is well, I'll
talk while you're talking,
the message is, well, you can talk.
This is a place where everybody can talk.
It's like, no, it's not.
This is a place where
people paid to hear me talk.
So I'm not gonna talk
till everyone's listening.
And so then you get that
stillness and then you just wait
because that stillness
turns into an expectation.
And then it turns into a
kind of nervous expectation.
Like what the hell is he
doing? It's not manipulative.
It's a sense of timing.
It's like just when that's
right, you think, okay,
now it's time to start.
- Well, the interesting thing
about that nervous expectation
is from an audience perspective,
we're in it together.
- Yeah.
- I mean, into that silence,
there is a togetherness to it.
- Of course, it's the union
of everyone's attention.
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
And that's a great thing.
I mean, you love that at a concert
when everyone, it's not silence then,
but when everyone's attention is unified
and everyone's moving in unison,
it's like we're all worshiping
the same thing, right?
And that would be the
point of the conversation.
The point of the lecture, and the worship
is the direction of attention towards it.
And it's communion
because everyone's doing
it at the same time.
And so, I mean, there's
not much difference
between lecture theater and a
church in that regard, right?
It's the same fundamental
layout and structure.
And they're very integrally
associated with one another,
one really grew out of the other,
the lecture theater
grew out of the church.
So it's perfectly reasonable
to be thinking about it
in those terms.
And then, okay, so after the lecture
we play a piece of music
that is a piece of music
that I've been producing
with some musicians
for a couple of books I'm
gonna release in the fall.
Terrible books.
"ABC of Childhood Tragedy."
They're called dark, dark books.
Dark and comical books.
Terrible books.
Heartbreaking illustrations.
We set them to music, and so
we play a piece from that.
And then afterwards I
usually meet about 150 people
to have photographs, so each
of of those is a little-
- [Lex] Is there a little
sparkle of human connection
that you have to-
- A lot.
A lot.
It's a very intense 10
seconds with every person.
You think, well, how
10 seconds be intense?
It's like pay enough attention.
It gets intense real quick.
- Does it break your heart
to say goodbye so many times?
- It's like being in a wedding lineup,
at a wedding that you wanna be at.
And everybody's dressed up
and that's so weird, eh,
'cause I bought these expensive suits
when I went on tour and it broke my heart
'cause I spent so much money on them.
I thought, God, that's
completely unconscionable.
I thought no way, man.
- Yeah.
- I'm in this 100%.
And so I'm gonna dress with respect.
And
like 60% of the audience comes
in two or three piece suits.
They're all dressed up.
Then there's this line to greet me
and they're all happy to see me.
That's not so hard to take. You know?
Although it is in a sense, right?
Because normal interactions
are pretty shallow
and you think I don't
want shallow interactions.
It's like yes, you do most of the time.
- Yeah. It's intense.
- It's very intense.
- And I don't know if you-
- You've had a taste of this
no doubt 'cause people recognize you.
- Yeah, but I also have
when a person recognizes me
and they come with the love
and they're often brilliant people,
one of the thoughts I have to deal with,
one of the dragons in my
own mind is, you know,
thinking that I don't
deserve that kind attention.
- [Jordan] Yeah. Well, you probably don't.
- Right, I don't.
- But maybe you could.
- So it's a burden in
that I have to step up
to be the kind of person
that deserves that,
not deserves that, but in part deserves
that kind of attention,
and that's like holy shit.
- It's crucially important too,
because if someone comes
up to you in an airport
and they know who you are
and they're brave enough
to admire you or who
you are attempting to be
and you make a mistake,
they will never forget it.
- Yeah.
- So it's a high stakes enterprise.
- And the flip side of that,
especially with young people,
a few words you can say can change
the direction of their life.
- Yeah. One way or another.
And so I really have to
watch this too in airports
'cause I do not like airports.
I do not like the creeping
totalitarianism in airports.
They've always bothered me.
- Yes.
- They really bothered me.
- Yes.
- And I'm an unpleasant travel companion
for my wife sometimes because of that.
Although I think we've worked that out.
Thank God 'cause we're
doing a lot of traveling,
but most of the security guards
and the border personnel, all
those people, they know me.
And as a general rule, they're
positively predisposed to me.
And so if I'm peevish or irritable
then well, that's not good, it's not good.
And so that's a tight rope to walk too
because I do not like that
creeping totalitarianism,
but by the same token, you know,
if you're just one of the crowd, just,
sometimes you it's good
just to be one of the crowd
and then you're a little irritable
and people can just brush that off.
But if you're someone they have
dared to open their heart to
'cause that's what admiration is,
and you betray that,
then that's a real,
they'll never forget it.
And then they'll tell everyone too.
So it takes a lot of alertness.
And so Tammy and I, our
life has got complicated
because in Toronto, for example,
we can't really just go for a walk.
It's always a high drama production,
'cause always people come up
and they have some
heartrending story to tell.
And I'm not being cynical about that.
- Yes.
- It's a hard thing to bear
because people don't do that.
They don't just open
themselves up to you like that
and share the tragedy of their life.
But that's an everyday occurrence.
And so when we go up to our cottage,
which is outta the city,
it's a relief, you know,
because as wonderful as
that is, like it's a weird,
I have a weird life
because everywhere I go,
it's very weird.
It's like I'm surrounded by old friends
because I walk down the street
in any city now virtually
and people say, "Hello, Dr. Peterson.
So nice to see you."
Or they say better things than
that. Very rarely bad things.
One experience in 5,000, maybe.
Very rare.
Although you don't forget those either,
but it's very strange.
- And there's an intimacy,
they know you well.
And because they leap into,
they avoid the small talk often.
- Mm-hmm. They leap into familiarity.
- It really is like it's an old friend
and it feels like that.
For me personally,
the experience is the
goodbye hurts because
there's a sense where you're never gonna
see that friend again.
- Right.
Yeah. That's a strange thing, eh?
- So to me, a lot of the,
a lot of it just feels like goodbyes.
- Mm-hmm.
And it is.
You're right about that.
And I mean, that's I suppose in some sense
part of the pain of opening
yourself up to people
because they also, Tammy has
been struck particularly.
She said, "I really never
knew what men were like."
I said, "Well, what do you mean?"
She said, "I cannot believe
how polite the men are
when they come and talk to you."
'Cause it's always the same.
The pattern's very similar.
The person comes up. They're mostly men.
Not always, but mostly.
And they're tentative
and they're very polite.
Very, very polite.
And they say, "I hope
I'm not bothering you.
Do you mind that I say..."
They're not bothering me.
And I'm doing everything I can
to not be the guy who's bothered by that.
It's like, who do you think you are?
- Yeah. (laughing) Yes.
- You're the guy that what, is
famous and now is above that?
- Yeah.
- You don't wanna be that guy.
- No.
- So you wanna be grateful
all the time when people
open up like that.
And so you gotta be alert and
on point to do that properly,
like right away, 'cause
for you, it's five seconds
or 10 seconds or 20
seconds, whatever it is,
but for them they've opened up
and so you can really nail
them if you're foolish.
- After the 150 people, how
do you come down from that?
How do you find yourself again?
- Well, that was often when I
got caught in Twitter traps,
you know, 'cause I'm so burned out by then
from the talk and the
audience interactions
and the whole day, 'cause it's
a new city, it's a new hotel.
It's a new 5,000 people.
It's a new book chapter.
It's a whole new horizon of ideas
and it's off to another city the next day.
I'm so burnt out by then
that I'm not as good
at controlling my impulses as I might be
and Twitter was a real
catastrophe for that
'cause it would hook me
and then I couldn't...
Like I used to, when I was
working on my book a lot,
I used to call Tammy.
I'd say, "Look, you
have to come and get me.
I can't stop.
I can't stop."
I got tired, eh?
And then I kind of 'cause it's part
of a kind of hypomanic focus.
I couldn't quit. It's like,
oh no, I'm still writing.
I need to get away from
this, but I couldn't stop.
And so it's better to
read something.
A book.
- Fiction, nonfiction?
- Fiction.
Stephen King.
I was reading a lot of Stephen King
when I was on tour last time.
That was good.
I like Stephen King a lot.
- So great narratives.
- Great and great characterization.
You know?
And there's a familiarity
about Steven King's writing too
that he writes about people you know.
And so I really found that a relief
and so that was useful.
And that in order to
tolerate this, let's say,
or to be able to sustain it,
well, that's taken a lot of negotiation
on the part of Tammy and I,
because she's dragged
into this and you know,
her life is part of
this, whatever this is.
And she's had to find her way and has.
For example, now she has
a different hotel room
than me when we travel.
And she found that she
didn't wanna be on the tour
this spring and I was
ill again for part of it
and that made it complicated,
but she went away back home
and she came back and she said,
and she was nervous about it, she said,
"I think I need my own room."
And part of me was not happy with that.
It's like, what do you
mean, you need your,
like are we not married anymore?
It's like you need your own room.
And she said, "Well, you know, I can't,"
she has to do exercises
because she was really sick
and she has to keep herself in shape.
And she has to have some time to do that.
And she does a lot of
prayer and meditation
and she needs the time and
she has her own podcast,
which is going quite well
and she needs the time.
And I trust her and she said, "Well,
I need this in order to continue."
And I thought, "Well, okay,
like if you need this
in order to continue.
Yes."
'Cause she went away and didn't say,
"Well, I don't want to be on the tour.
I don't wanna do this anymore."
She went way and prayed, let's say,
how can I continue to do this?
And that was the answer.
And so she has her own hotel room
and that was a really
good decision on her part.
And she's very good and
getting better all the time
at figuring out what has to happen for her
to make this sustainable.
And all that's been is a plus,
'cause I don't want to travel without her.
And I don't want her life to be miserable
and I want her to be fully on board.
And so she has to be properly selfish
like everyone does in a relationship.
- Yeah, well, and not just that,
this is a weird thing that you're doing
and you have to, both you
and her have to figure out
how to manage this very intense
intellectual social journey.
- Well, there's another element to it too
that I didn't tell you about.
So that was a typical day, but
it's missing a big component
because usually we also have a dinner
with like 30 cultural
representatives, I suppose,
10 to 30 from each country
'cause I have a network of
people who have networks
who are setting me up
with key decision makers
in each country.
And so then we have like
an hour and a half of that.
Now sometimes that's on a
day when I don't have a talk,
but sometimes the talks are back to back.
And so she also has to manage
that and to be gracious,
and then people are
showing us exciting things
on tours in the cities which is all,
like it's a surfeit of wonderful.
- Yes, exactly.
But yeah. You have to be there for it.
You have to be present for it mentally.
- Yeah.
- As a curious mind,
as an intellectual mind.
How do you get to sleep?
- Fortunately, that is
almost never a problem.
Even when I was unbelievably
ill for about three years,
I thought about that a lot too, you know,
that I didn't do a really
good job of explaining that
while I was ill because
it appeared in some sense
that the reason I was ill was
because I was taking benzodiazepines,
but that isn't why.
I was ill and then I took them
and very low dose and I
took that for a long time
and it helped whatever was wrong with me.
And it looks like it was an allergy
or maybe multiple allergies
and then that stopped working.
And so I took a little
bit more for about a month
and that made it way worse
and so then I cut back a lot,
and then, then things really
got outta hand and so-
- So there was a deeper thing.
- Oh yeah. Definitely.
- Then the benzo.
- Oh yeah.
- What can you put words to-
- Well, I had a lot of immune...
Well, my daughter, as everyone knows,
has a very reactive immune system.
And Tammy has three
immunological conditions.
Each of them quite serious.
And I had psoriasis
and peripheral uveitis,
which is an autoimmune
condition and alopecia areata
and chronic gum disease,
all of which appeared
to be allergy related.
And so Mikhaila seems
to have got all of that.
And so that, and that I
think was at the bottom of
'cause I also had this
proclivity to depression
that was part of my family history.
But I think that was all
immunological as far as I can tell.
So one of the things
that's happened to me,
I always noticed I
really couldn't breathe.
Like I could breathe about 1/4
as much as I sometimes could.
And so I was always short of breath
and it looks like what that was perhaps
was I was always on the border
of an anaphylactic reaction,
which is not pleasant.
And that's hyper sympathetic activation,
no parasympathetic activation.
I couldn't relax at all.
- That's a immunological response.
- Allergic response. Yeah.
So anyways, that was
what seemed, now this,
I don't like to talk about this much
'cause it's so bloody
radical and you know,
I don't like to propagate it,
but this diet seems to
have stopped all of that.
I don't have psoriasis. All
of the patches have gone.
- Yeah.
- My gum disease,
which is incurable.
I had multiple surgeries to deal with it,
is completely gone.
Took three years.
My right eye, which was quite cloudy.
It's cleared up completely.
What else has changed?
Well, I lost 50 pounds like
instantly and kept it off.
- Well, I should mention that I, too,
am not a deep investigator
of nutritional science.
I have my skepticism towards the degree
to which it is currently a science
'cause like a lot of complex systems,
it's full of mystery
and full of profiteers,
people that profit off
different kinds of diets.
But I should say for me personally,
it does seem that I feel by far the best
when I eat only meat.
It's very interesting.
And I discovered that
a long time ago.
- It's ridiculous.
First of all.
- How'd you discover it?
- So the discovery went like this,
I started listening to
ultra-marathon runners
about 15 years ago
and they started talking
about fat adapted running.
So I first discovered that I
don't have to run super fast
to enjoy running.
That in fact, I really enjoy
running at a slower pace.
So that was like, step one.
I was like, oh, okay.
If I maintain something
called the math rule,
which is a pretty low heart
rate, if I maintain that,
you can actually get pretty fast
while maintaining a pretty
slow average speed in general.
Anyway, they fuel themselves
on low carb diets.
So I got into that.
On top of that they also fast often.
So I discovered how incredible
my mind feels when fasted,
you know, people call it
intermittent fasting, but-
- Well, that's an
optimization of death, eh,
because when you fast your
body logically and obviously
if you think about it
biologically is, well,
what does your body scavenge first?
Well, damaged tissue.
So, and I know the literature
on fasting to some degree
and it's very compelling literature.
If you starve dogs down,
I think it's 20% below, rats too,
below their optimal body
weight they live 30% longer.
- Yeah.
- That's a lot, 30%.
Like it's like 30%. Yeah, 30%.
- Well, there is aspect
to a lot of these things
that make me nervous
'cause I always feel like
there's no free lunch, that
I'm gonna pay for it somehow,
but there's a focus that I am
able to attain when I fast.
Especially when I eat once a day.
My mind is almost like nervously focused.
It's almost like an anxiety,
but a positive one or
one that I can channel
into just like an excitement.
- You know, I wonder how
much of that's associated
with, well, imagine that
that signifies lack of food,
which not that hard to imagine.
Well, maybe you should be a lot more alert
in that situation, right?
- Yeah.
- Biologically speaking,
because you're in hunting mode,
let's say, you know, not desperate,
but in hunting mode.
And God only knows maybe human beings
should be in hunting mode all the time.
- Often, but we don't know that.
So I wonder if it has
a stress on the system
that long term cause the system to-
- It doesn't look like it.
- Okay.
- It seems, on the case of fasting, not.
And then on top of that,
I discovered that the thing I enjoy,
I just don't enjoy eating fat as much.
- Mm-hmm.
- So I love eating meat.
And when you talk about low carb diet,
so I just discovered through that process,
if somewhat fatty meat, but just meat,
I just feel a lot of the things
that make me feel weird about food,
like a little groggy or
like full or just whatever,
the aspects of food that I don't enjoy,
they're not there with meat.
And I'm still able to enjoy company
and when I eat once a day and eat meat,
at least in Texas,
you could still have all the merriment of-
- [Jordan] Yeah.
- You have dinner with friends.
Now I don't do the, you know,
you have a very serious thing that
there's health benefits that
you are very serious about.
For me, I could still drink whiskey.
Like I'll still do the things
that add a little bit of-
- Spice.
- Spice into the thing.
- Yeah.
- Now when you completely
remove the spice, it does
become more difficult.
- Yeah. It's more difficult socially.
And Tammy seems to only
be able to eat lamb,
although she might be
able to eat non aged beef.
And that makes traveling complicated too.
- Yeah.
- Right.
Because, well, for obvious reasons.
It's like really that's all you can eat?
Yeah. Well, c'est la vie.
And maybe that's a form of craziness, but-
- If we can return to actually
the thing you were talking
about when you're
thinking about a question
before the lecture.
- Yeah.
- Let me ask you about
thinking in general.
This is something maybe
that you and Jim Keller
think a lot about is
thinking how to think.
How do you think through an idea?
- Well, first of all, I think, okay,
that's a really good question.
We've tried to work that
out with this essay app
that my son and I have developed,
because if you're gonna
write, the first question is,
well, what should I write about?
- What's the name of the app?
- Essay.app.
- Mm-hmm.
- And well, the first question
is, well, what bugs you?
What's bugging you?
This is such a cool thing,
it's like where is my destiny?
Well, what bothers you?
Well, that's where your destiny is.
Your destiny is to be
found in what bothers you.
Why do those things bother you?
There's a lot of things
you could be bothered by,
like a million things, man.
But some things grip you.
They bug you and they might
make you resentful and bitter
'cause they bug you so much.
Like they're your things, man.
They've got you.
So then I look for a question
that I would like the answer to,
and I would really like the answer to it.
So I don't assume I
already have the answer
'cause I would actually really
like to have the answer.
So if I could get a better answer, great.
And so that's the first thing
and that's like a prayer.
It's like, okay, here's a mystery.
I would like to delve into it further.
Well, so that's humility.
It's like here's a mystery.
Which means I don't know.
I would like to delve into it further,
which means I don't know enough already.
And then comes the revelation.
It's like, well, what's a revelation?
Well, if you ask yourself a
question, it's a real question.
Do you get an answer or not?
And the answer is, well, yeah.
Thoughts start to appear in your head.
So-
- From somewhere.
- That's right, from somewhere.
- Where do they come
from? Do you have a sense?
- Depends on what you're aiming at.
- Depends on the question.
- No, no.
It does to some degree.
It depends on your intent.
So imagine that your intent
is to make things better.
Then maybe they come from
the place that's designed
to make things better.
Maybe your intent is to make things worse.
Then they come from hell.
And you think not really.
It's like you're so sure
about that, are you?
- But is your intent
conscious? Like are you able-
- It's conscious and habitual, right?
'Cause as you practice
something consciously,
it becomes habitual, but it's conscious.
It's like when I sit down
before I do a lecture,
I think, okay, what's the goal here?
To do the best job I can.
To what end?
Well, people are coming here
not for political issues,
they're coming here
because they're trying to
make their lives better.
Okay. So what are we doing?
We're conducting a joint investigation
into the nature of that
which makes life better.
Okay, what's my role?
To do as good a job
about that as possible.
What state of mind do I have to be in?
Am I annoyed about the
theater or am I clued in
and thrilled that 4,000
people have showed up
at substantial expense and trouble
to come and listen to me talk.
And if I'm not in that
state of mind, I think,
well maybe I need something
to eat or maybe I need to talk
to someone because in
gratitude is no place to start.
It's like I should be thrilled
to be there obviously.
And so that orientation has to be there.
And then is it conscious?
All this is conscious.
What am I serving?
The highest good I can conceptualize.
What is that?
I have some sense,
but I don't know it in the final analysis,
which is why the investigation
is being conducted.
Who's doing it?
Me, whoever I'm communing
with and the audience.
And so I try to get myself
and I chase everybody away for that.
It's like I have to do that by myself.
- Are you writing stuff down?
- Yes, at that point I
I just make point notes
and it's usually about maybe 30 notes.
But then on stage I never refer to them,
and I often don't even use
the structure that I laid out.
- It's kind of an interesting thing,
from where do powerful phrases come from?
Do you try to encapsulate an
idea into a sentence or two?
- Well, when I talk,
I've practiced this since
consciously, since 1985,
I try to feel and see if the
words are stepping stones
or foundation stones, right?
It's like is this solid?
Is this word solid? Is this phrase solid?
Is this sentence solid?
Like it's a real sense
of fundamental foundation
under each word.
And I suppose people ask me if I pray,
and I would say I pray before every word.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Well, when you're asking questions,
like you're very clear headed
and present in your ability
to ask questions and inquire.
So how do you do that?
- So first of all,
I'm worried that my
mind easily gets trapped
when I step on a word
and I know it's unstable,
you kind of realize that
you don't really know
the definitions of any words you use
and that can be debilitating.
So I kind of try to be more carefree
about the words I use,
because otherwise you get trapped.
- [Jordan] You don't wanna be obsessional.
- Like literally my mind
halfway through the sentence
will think, well, what does
the word sentence mean?
- [Jordan] Right. Right, right.
Well, you know, neurologically-
- And then everything else just explodes.
You're a big picture idea explodes
and you lost yourself in the minutiae.
- Well neurologically
there's a production center
and an editing center.
And those can be separately
affected by strokes.
And so often when people
are writing or talking,
they try to activate
both at the same time.
And so people will try to write an essay
and get every sentence
right in the first draft.
That's a big mistake.
And so then you might say, well,
how can you be careful with
your words but carefree?
And the answer is orient
yourself properly, right?
While in the conversation we're having,
you have an orientation structure.
You want to be prepared.
You wanna be attentive.
Then you wanna have an
interesting conversation
and you wanna have the kind
of interesting conversation
that other people wanna listen to
that will be good for them in some manner.
Okay. So that's pretty good frame.
And then you kind of scour
your heart and you think
is that really what you want?
Are you after fame or after notoriety
or are you after money?
I'm not saying any of those
things are necessarily bad,
but they're not optimal,
especially if you're not
willing to admit them, right?
And so they can contaminate you.
So you want to be decontaminated
so you have the right trip, let's say.
And so you have to put yourself,
that's a meditative practice.
You have to put yourself in
the right receptive position
with the right goal in mind, then you can,
and I think you can get
better and better at this,
then you can trust what's going to happen.
You know, so for example,
before I came here,
I mean, I presume you have a reason
for doing the podcast with me.
What's the reason?
- I mean, we wanted to
talk for a long time.
- Yeah.
- So the reason has evolved.
One of the reasons is I've listened to you
for quite a long time so
you've become a one way friend.
And I have many, one way friends.
Some of my best friends
don't even know I exist.
(Lex laughing)
So I'm a big fan of
podcast and audio books.
Actually, most of my friends are dead.
- Yeah, right.
(Lex laughing)
- The writers.
- The definition of a reader.
- Yeah. (laughing)
- Guy with a lot of great dead friends.
- So I wanted to meet this one way friend,
I suppose, and have a conversation.
And then there was this kind of puzzle
that I've been longing to solve
the same reason I went to Ukraine
of asking this question
of myself, who am I?
And what was this part of the world?
What is this thing that
happened in the 20th century
that I lost so much of my family there.
And I feel so much of my family
is defined by that place.
Now that place includes the Soviet Union.
It includes Russia and Ukraine.
It includes Nazi Germany,
includes these big powerful leaders
and huge millions of people
that were lost in the beauty,
the power of the dream,
but where also the torture
that was forced onto them
through different
governmental institutions.
And you are somebody that
seemed from some angle
to also be drawn to try to
understand what was that.
And not in some sort of historical sense,
but in a deeply psychological human sense.
What is that? Will it repeat again?
In what ways is it repeating again?
- And how can we stop it.
- And how can we stop it?
- That's the crucial issue.
- I felt I wanted to, from
a very different backgrounds
pull at the thread of that curiosity.
You know, I'm an engineer,
you're a psychologist,
both lost in that curiosity
and both wear suits (laughing)
and a talk with various
levels of eloquence (laughing)
about sort of
the shadows that history
cast on us.
And so that was one.
And also the psychology.
I wanted to be a
psychiatrist for a long time.
I was fascinated by the human mind
until I discovered
artificial intelligence,
the fact that I could program
and make a robot move.
And until I discovered that magic,
I thought I wanted to
understand the human mind
by being a psychiatrist,
by talking to people
through talk therapy, psychotherapy.
- So now you've got
the best of both worlds
because you get to talk to
people and you get build robots.
- Yeah, I mean, but the dream
ultimately is the robot.
That I felt like by building the thing
can you start to try to understand it.
I think that's one way.
- Yeah, right.
- I mean, we all have
different skills of proclivity.
So like my particular one
has to do with
I learn by building.
- Yeah.
- I think through a thing by building it.
- Yeah.
- And programming
is a wonderful thing because it allows you
to like build a little toy example.
So in the same way you can do
a little thought experiment,
programming allows you to create
a thought experiment in action.
It can move, it can live, it can-
- Right.
- And then you can
ask questions of it.
So all of those, because of my
interest in Freud and Jung,
you also in different ways
have delved deeply into humanity,
the human psyche, through the perspective
of those psychologists.
So for all those reasons,
I thought our paths should cross.
- Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Well, so that's quite a frame
for a discussion, right?
You had all sorts of reasons.
And then you think, well,
are you just letting the
conversation go where it will?
It's like, well, not exactly.
You spent all this time.
It's not like this came about by accident,
this conversation, you spent
all this time framing it.
And so all of that provides
the implicit sub structure
for the play in the conversation.
And if you have that
implicit, here's another way.
This is very much worth knowing is
if you get the implicit
structure of perception right,
everything becomes a game.
And not only that, a game you wanna play
and maybe in the final analysis,
a game you'd wanna play forever.
So, you know, that's obviously
a distant beckoning ideal,
but we know the games need rules.
Or there's no play.
- Is there advice you can give
now that we know the
frame to give to me, Lex,
about how to do this podcast better?
How to
think about this world?
How to be a good engineer?
how to be a good human being?
From what you know.
- Take your preoccupation
with suffering seriously.
It's a serious business.
Right?
And that's part of that, to
circle back to the beginning,
let's say, that's that willingness
to gaze into the abyss,
which is obviously what you were doing
when you went to Ukraine.
It's like it's gazing into the
abyss that makes you better.
The thing is, and this is
maybe where Nietzsche's ideas,
not as differentiated as it became,
sometimes your gaze can
be forcefully directed
towards the abyss.
And then you're traumatized.
If it's involuntary and
accidental, it can kill you.
The more it's voluntary,
the more transformative it is.
And that's part of that idea
about facing death in hell.
It's like can you tolerate death in hell?
And the answer is, this
terrible answer is yes.
To the degree that you're
willing to do it voluntarily.
And then you might ask, well,
why should I have to subject
myself to death in hell?
I'm innocent.
And then the answer to that is
even the innocent must
be voluntarily sacrificed
to the highest good.
(Lex inhales and exhales deeply)
- That's such an interesting distinction.
Voluntary suffering.
- Voluntary. Yeah.
Yeah, well, that's why the
central Christian doctrine
is pick up your cross and follow me.
And I'm speaking, not in
religious terms saying that.
I'm just speaking as a psychologist.
It's like one of the things we've learned
in the last 100 years is
voluntary exposure to that
which freezes and terrifies you
in measured proportions is curative.
- So a form of, at least in
part involuntary sufferings,
depression,
do you have advice for people
on how to find a way out?
You're a man who has suffered in this way,
perhaps continue to suffer in this way.
How do you find a way out?
- The first thing I do as a clinician
if someone comes to me
and says they're depressed
is ask myself a question.
Well, what does this person mean by that?
So I have to find out like,
because maybe they're not depressed,
maybe they're hyper anxious
or maybe they're obsessional.
Like there's various forms
of powerful negative emotion,
so they need to be differentiated.
But then the next question
you have to ask is, well,
are you depressed or do
you have a terrible life?
Or is it some combination of the two?
So if you're depressed,
as far as I can tell, you
don't have a terrible life.
You have friends, you have family,
you have an intimate relationship,
you have a job or a career,
your about as educated as you should be
given your intelligence,
you use your time outside of work wisely.
You're not beholden to
alcohol or other temptations.
You're engaged in the community
in some fundamental sense
and all that's working.
Now, if you have all that and
you're feeling really awful,
you're either ill or you're depressed.
And so then sometimes
there's a biochemical route
to that treatment of that.
My experience as being as a clinician
is if you're depressed,
but you have a life
and you take an antidepressant,
it will probably help you a lot.
Now, maybe you're not depressed exactly.
You just have a terrible life.
What does that look like?
You have no relationship.
Your family's a mess.
You've got no friends. You've got no plan.
You've got no job.
You use your time outside
of work not only badly,
but destructively, you have
a drug or alcohol habit
or some other vice, pornography addiction.
You are completely unengaged
in the surrounding community.
You have no scaffolding
whatsoever to support you
in your current mode of
being or you move forward.
And then as a therapist,
well, you do two things.
Well, if it's depression
per se, well, like I said,
there's sometimes a biochemical
route, a nutritional route.
There's ways that can be addressed.
It's probably physiological,
at least in part,
if you're depressed, but
you have an okay life.
Sometimes it's conceptual.
You can turn to dreams
sometimes to help people
'cause dreams contain the
seeds of the potential future.
And if your person is a real good dreamer
and you can analyze dreams,
that can be really helpful.
But that seems to have only
true for more creative people.
And for the people who
just have a terrible life,
it's like, okay, you have a terrible life.
Well, let's pick a front.
How about you need, how
about you need a friend,
like one sort of friend.
Do you know how to shake
hands and introduce yourself?
I'll have the person show me.
So let's do it for a sec.
So.
It's like this, hi, I'm Jordan.
And people don't know how to do that.
And then they can't even
get the ball rolling.
For the listener, Jordan just
gave me a firm handshake.
- Yeah. As opposed to
a dead fish, you know?
And there's these elementary social skills
that hypothetically, if
you were well cared for,
you learned when you were like three.
- Yeah.
- And sometimes people have,
I had lots of clients
to whom no one ever paid any attention.
And they needed like
10,000 hours of attention.
And some of that was just listening
'cause they had 10,000
hours of conversations
they never had with anyone.
And they were all tangled up in their head
and they had to just,
one client in particular
I worked with this person for 15 years.
And what she wanted from me
was for me just to shut
the hell up for 50 minutes,
was very hard for me.
And to just tell me
what had happened to her
and then what happened at
the end of the conversation,
then I could discuss a bit with her.
And then as we progressed
through the years,
the amount of time that we
spent in discussion increased
in proportion in these
sessions until by the time
we stopped seeing each other,
when my clinical practice collapsed,
we were talking about 80% of the time,
but she literally,
she'd never been attended
to properly ever.
And so she was an uncarved block
in the Taoist sense, right?
She hadn't been subjected
to those flaming swords
that separated the wheat from the chaff.
And so you can do that in therapy.
If you're listening and
you're depressed, I would say,
if you can't find a therapist,
and that's getting harder and harder,
'cause it's actually become
illegal to be a therapist now
'cause you have to
agree with your clients,
which is a terrible thing to do with them.
Just like it's terrible just
to arbitrarily oppose them.
You could do the self
authoring program online
'cause it helps you
write an autobiography.
And so if you have memories
that are more than 18 months old
that bother you when you think them up,
part of you is locked inside that.
An undeveloped part of you
is still trapped in that,
that's a metaphorical
way of thinking about,
that's why it still has
emotional significance.
So you can write about
your past experiences.
But I would say wait
for at least 18 months
if something bad has happened to you,
'cause otherwise you just hurt yourself
again by encountering it.
You can bring yourself up to
date with an autobiography.
There's an analysis of faults and virtues.
That's the present authoring.
And then there's a guided writing exercise
that helps you make a future plan.
That's...
Young men who do that could go to college,
young men who do that 90 minutes,
just the future authoring, 90 minutes.
They're 50% less likely to drop out.
That's all it takes.
- So sometimes depression
is this heavy cloud that makes it hard
to even make a single step towards it?
Or you said isolate, make a friend.
- Oh man. Sometimes like-
- The first step
is extremely difficult.
- Oh my God.
Sometimes it's way worse than that.
Like I had clients who were so depressed
they literally couldn't get out of bed.
So what's their first step?
It's like can you sit up once today?
No.
Can you prop yourself up
on your elbows once today?
Like you just, you scale back the dragon
till you find one that's
conquerable that moves you forward.
There's a rubric for life.
Scale back the dragons till
you find one conquerable
and it'll give you a little bit of goal.
Commensurate it with the struggle.
But the plus side of that,
'cause you think that
God, that's depressing.
You mean I have to start by sitting up?
Well, you do if you can't sit up.
But the plus side of that is
it's the pareto distribution
issue is that aggregates,
exponentially increase.
And failures do too, by the way.
But aggregates exponentially increase.
So once you start the ball rolling,
it can get zipping along pretty good.
This person that I talked about
was incapable of sitting with me in a cafe
when we first met, just talking,
even though I was her therapist.
But by the end she was
doing standup comedy.
So you know, it took years,
but still most people
won't do standup comedy.
That's quite the bloody achievement.
She would read her poetry on stage too.
So for someone who was
petrified into paralysis
by social anxiety and who
had to start very small
is a hell of an accomplishment.
- Yeah. It all starts with one step.
Do you have advice for
young people in high school?
A lot of people look up to you for advice,
for strength, for strength
to search for themselves,
to find themselves.
- Take on some responsibility.
Do something for other people.
You're doing something for
yourself while you're doing that
even if you don't know it for sure,
'cause you're a community across time.
Find something to serve.
- Somebody to help.
- Someone to help.
- A problem to solve.
- A job.
Find a job, do your
best with the customers.
Don't be above your job.
You're gonna get an entry
level job when you're a kid.
Well, what else would you
want? You wanna be the boss?
What do you know? You don't know anything.
You could be the boss of your job.
You know, if you're
working in a grocery store
or you're working in a convenience store,
assuming you're not working
for terrified tyrants,
you can be nice to the customers.
You can develop your social skills.
You can learn how to handle
boss/employee relationship.
You can be there 15 minutes
early and leave 15 minutes late.
Like you can learn in
an entry level job, man.
And I'll tell you, if you
take an entry level job
and you learn and it's a
reasonably decent place,
you will not be in an
entry level job for long
because everyone who's
competent is desperate
for competent people.
And if you go and show
yourself as competent,
they'll be a trial period,
but if you go show yourself as competent,
all sorts of doors you
didn't even know were there
will start opening like mad.
- So you strive for
competence, for craftsmanship.
- Yeah. Yep, yep.
For discipline.
You know, I mean, I said in
one of the chapters in my books
is focused on putting your house in order.
It's like, well, how do you start?
Make your bed.
You know?
It actually took me quite
a long time in my life
before I made my bed
regularly in the morning,
most of my life was in pretty good order,
but that was one thing
I didn't have in order.
My clothes in my closet as well.
All that's in order, not all of it.
I'm cleaning out some drawers right now,
but look around and see
what bugs you in your room.
Just look.
It's like, okay, I'm in my room.
Do I like this room? No, it bugs me.
Okay.
Why?
Well, the paint's peeling there
and it's dusty there
and the carpet's dirty
and that corner's kind of ugly.
And the light there isn't very good.
And my clothes closet's a mess
so I don't even like to open it.
Okay. That's a lot of problems.
That sucks.
That's a lot of opportunity.
Pick something and fix it.
- Something that bugs you.
- Yeah. But not too much.
So the rule is pick something
that you know would make,
pick a problem, pick a
solution to it that you know
would help that you could
do, that you would do.
So you have to negotiate with yourself.
It's like, well, I won't
clean up this room.
How do you know?
Well, I've been in here for 10 years
and I've never cleaned it up.
It's like, well obviously
that's too big a dragon for you.
Would you clean one drawer?
Find out.
And so imagine now you wanna be happy
when you open that drawer and you think,
well, that's stupid.
It's like, is it?
Maybe it's your sock drawer.
Which I cleaned up in my room
the other day, by the way.
You're gonna open that every morning.
- Yeah.
- So that's like 30 seconds
of your life every day.
Okay. So that's three minutes a week.
That's 12 minutes a month.
That's two hours a year.
So maybe your life is made out,
if you've got 16 hours a
day, let's figure this out.
Five, 12 in an hour, 12 in
an hour, 144 in 12 hours.
Yeah. Let's say 200.
200 five minute chunks.
That's your life.
- Ladies and gentlemen, Jordan
Peterson did just some math
of how many five minute
chunks there are in a day.
And I'm pretty sure
that's pretty accurate.
- It's approximately right.
So you got 200 five minute chunks.
And they repeat, a lot of them repeat.
So if you get every one of those right,
they're trivial, right?
Who cares what my sock drawer looks like.
It's there. Fair enough, man.
But that's your life.
The things you repeat every day,
the mundane things.
Think I could get all
those mundane things right.
That's the game rules.
It's like now all the mundane is in place.
Now you can play 'cause
all the mundane's in place.
And this is actually true.
So with children,
imagine you want your children to play.
Well, play is very fragile neurologically.
Any competing motivation or
emotion will suppress play.
So everything has to be in order.
Everything has to be a walled garden
before the children will play.
That's a good way of thinking about it.
So you put everything in order
and you think, oh my God,
now I'm tyrannized by this order.
It's like, no, you aren't,
not if it's voluntary.
And then the order is the
precondition for the freedom.
And so then all of a sudden
you get all these things in order.
It's like, oh, look at this.
I've got some room to play here.
And then maybe you're not depressed.
Now, it's often not that simple. You know?
Not that that simple.
Try putting your room
in order. Perfect order.
That's hard, man.
- And it's a really
powerful way to think about
those five minute chunks.
Just get one of them right in a day.
- Yeah, well, if you do that for 200 days,
your life is in order.
- Yeah.
- You know, I thought I did
that with my clients a lot.
So a lot of them would
come home from work,
the guys, eh, and their wives
would meet them at the door
and it'd be a fight right away, you know?
And it's a clash there 'cause
he comes home and he's tired
and hungry and he's worked all day
and he's hoping that, you know,
he gets welcomed when he
comes back to the home.
But then the wife is at home
and she's been with the kids all day
and she's tired and hungry.
And she's hoping that when he comes home,
he'll show her some appreciation
for what's happened today.
And then they clash and
then they both have problems
to discuss 'cause they've had
their troubles during the day.
And so then every time they get together,
they are not like it's a bit
of a fight for 20 minutes.
And then the whole evening is screwed.
And so then you think,
okay, here's the deal.
It's knock and the door will open.
Okay, you get to pick what
happens when you come home,
but you have to figure out what it is.
So now this is the deal.
You treat yourself properly.
You imagine coming home
and it goes the way you
want and need it to go.
Okay, what does that look like?
You get to have it, but you
have to know what it is.
What does it look like?
And you think, okay, I want to come home.
I want to be happy about coming home.
I come home. I open the door.
I say, "Hello, honey. I'm home."
My wife says, "Hi! It's so
nice to hear your voice."
She comes up. She says, "Hi, dear."
She gives you a hug. She
says, "How is your day?"
And you say, "Well, we'll
sit and talk about that."
How is your day?
Well, we'll sit and talk about that.
Do you need something to eat?
Probably.
Let's go sit and talk about our day.
It's like that sounds pretty good.
Okay.
That sounds pretty good.
Might not be perfect, but
sounds a hell of a lot better
than what we're doing now.
So how about we go talk to,
we'll go talk to your wife.
He'll say, okay.
This is what's happening when I come home,
I would like it to be better.
What would you like to have happen
if you could have what you wanted?
And so she sits down and she thinks, okay,
if he comes home, what
do I want to have happen?
And then now you got
two visions and you say,
well, what would you like?
And you listen.
And she says, what would you like?
And you tell her, and then you think,
okay now can we bring
these visions together
so not only do we both get what we want,
but because we've brought them together,
we even get more than we want.
Well, who wouldn't agree to that?
Unless they were aiming down.
And that's so exciting,
it's not a compromise.
It's a union of ideals that
even makes a better ideal.
And then you get to come home.
And then there's another rule
that goes along with that,
which is please dear, have the grace
to allow me to do this stupidly
and badly while I learn.
at least 20 times.
- Yeah.
- And I'll give you the same leeway
and then we'll practice
stupidly for 20 times
and we'll talk about it and
then maybe we'll get it right
for the next 10,000 times.
- Yeah.
- Right?
And you can do that with your whole life
and you can do that with your kids
and you can do that with your family.
Like it's not easy, but you can do.
It's a lot easier than the alternative.
- Let me ask for some dating
advice from Jordan Peterson.
How do you find, on that
topic, the love of your life?
- That's a good question.
I was asked that multiple
times on my tour.
Three times in a row in fact,
'cause we ask people to
use this Slido gadget.
- That's a popular question?
- Very!
It always came up to the top
and I got asked that three times in a row
and I didn't have a good answer.
And then I thought, why
don't I have a good answer?
I thought, oh, I know why
'cause that's a stupid question.
(Lex laughing)
So why?
- Yeah.
- Why?
Because it's putting the
cart before the horse.
Here's the right question.
How do I make myself
into the perfect date?
You answer that question and
you will not have any problem
answering the previous question.
It's like what I want in a partner. Mm mm.
If I offered everything
I could to a partner,
who would I be?
You work on that.
Ask that question, just ask,
just ask yourself. Okay.
I have to be the person
that women would want.
Hmm. Okay. What do they want?
Clean.
That's not a bad start.
Reasonably good physical shape.
So healthy,
productive, generous, honest,
willing to delay gratification.
So you dance with a woman.
It's like what's she doing?
What are you two doing?
Well, it's a patterned,
there's patterns happening around you.
That's the music, patterns.
Patterns of being, that's the music.
Now, can you align
yourself with the patterns
of being gracefully?
That's what she's checking out.
And then can you do that with her?
And then can you do that in a
playful and attentive manner
and keep your bloody hands to yourself
for at least a minute?
And so can you dance in a playful manner?
It's like you can go through
this in your imagination
and you know, you'll know, you know?
And then you think, well, how
far am I from those things?
And the answer is usually, man,
it's a pretty horrible abyss
separating you from that ideal.
But the harder you work on
offering other people
what they need and want,
the more people will
line up to play with you.
And so it's the wrong question.
It's like how can I be
the best partner possible?
And then you think, well, if I do that,
people will just take advantage of me.
And that's the non naive objection, right?
Because the naive persons
think, well, I'll be good
and everyone will treat me right.
It's like the cynic says, no, I'll be good
and someone will take me out.
And then you think, well,
what do you do about that objection?
And the answer is, well,
you factor that in.
And that's why you're supposed to be,
what is it?
As soft as a dove and
as wise as a serpent.
It's like, I know you're full of snakes.
I know it.
Maybe I know it more than you
do, but we'll play anyways.
- Take the risk anyway.
- That's right. Voluntarily.
Right?
And what's so cool about
that is that even though
the person you're dealing
with is full of snakes,
if you offer your hand
in trust and it's real,
you will evoke the best in them.
- Yeah.
- And that's true
even I've dealt with people
who are pretty damn criminal
and pretty psychopathic and
sometimes dangerously so.
And you tread very lightly
when you're dealing
with someone like that,
especially if they're intoxicated.
And even then your best bet is
that alert trust.
It's the only, in fact, that
the only thing I know that,
I had one client who was a paranoid,
he was paranoid psychopath.
That's a bad combination.
He was a bad guy, man.
He had like four restraining orders on him
and restraining orders don't work
on the sort of people that
you put restraining orders on.
And he used to be harassed
now and then by, you know,
a bureaucrat in a bank
with delusions of power.
And he would say to them, he
used to kind of act this out
to me when I was talking to him, he'd say,
"I'm going to be your worst nightmare."
And he meant it.
- Yeah.
- And he would do it.
He had this obsessional
psychopathic vengeance
that was just like right
there, paranoid to the hilt.
And paranoid people are hyper acute.
So they're watching you
for any sign of deceit or manipulation.
And they're really good at it.
'cause like they're 100%
focus, that's what paranoid is.
It's 100% focus on that.
And even under those circumstances,
if you step carefully enough,
maybe you can avoid the ax.
That's a good thing to know
if you ever meet someone truly dangerous.
- Absolutely.
I believe in that, that
being fragile, nevertheless,
taking that leap of trust
towards another person,
even when they're dangerous,
especially when they're
dangerous, if you care,
if there's something there in
those hills you wanna find,
then that's probably the only way
you're gonna find it is taking that risk.
I have to ask you about "Gulag
Archipelago" by Solzhenitsyn
that speak to this very point.
There's so many layers that this book,
we could talk about it forever.
I'm sure in many ways we are
talking about it forever,
but there is sort of one
of the themes captured
in a few ways that was
described to the book
is that line between good and evil
that runs through every human being.
As he writes, "The line
dividing good and evil
cuts through the heart
of every human being.
During the life of any heart
this line keeps changing place;
sometimes it is squeezed
one way to exuberant evil
and sometimes it shifts
to allow enough space
for good to flourish.
One and the same human
being is, at various ages,
under various circumstances,
a totally different human being.
At times he is close to being a devil,
at times to sainthood.
But his name doesn't change,
and to that name we ascribe
the whole lot, good and evil."
What do you think about this line?
What do you think about this
thing where we talked about
if you give somebody a chance,
you actually bring out the best in them.
What do you think about this other aspect
that throughout time that
line shifts inside each person
and you get to define that shift?
What do you think about this line?
Are we all capable of evil?
- Well, you know, the cosmic drama,
that's Satan versus Christ.
It's like, well, who's that
about if it's not about you?
I'm speaking just as a psychologist
or as a literary critic,
those are characters.
At least they're that.
Well, are they human characters?
Well, obviously
Well, are they archetypal
human characters?
Yes. What does that mean
cosmically and ontologically?
I don't know.
Is the world is story?
Maybe.
- [Lex] But the way stories are often told
is the characters embody a stable-
- Yeah, I know.
Not great literature though.
It's very rare in great literature.
What you have in great
literature generally
is the internal drama, right?
As the literature becomes
more pop, I would say,
the characters are more unitary
so there's a real bad guy and he's all bad
and there's a real good
guy and he's all good.
And that's not as interesting.
It's not as sophisticated.
When you reach Dostoevsky in heights
in literary representation
or Shakespearean heights,
you can identify with the villain.
And that's when literature
really reaches its pinnacle in some sense.
- And also the characters
change throughout.
They shift throughout, they're
unpredictable throughout.
I'm taking the speaking of
Russia more seriously recently.
And I've gotten to talk to
translators of Dostoevsky
and Tolstoy and
Czechov and those kinds of folks,
and one of the mistakes
that translators made
with the Dostoevsky for the longest time
is they would quote,
unquote, fix the chaotic mess
that is Dostoevsky
because there was a sense
like he was too rushed in his writing.
It seemed like there was tangents
that had nothing to do with anything.
The characters were
unpredictable and inconsistent.
There's parts of phrases
that seemed to be incomplete,
that kind of stuff.
And what they realize that is,
that's not, that's
actually crafted that way.
It's not, you know, it's
like editing James Joyce,
like "Finnegans Wake" or something
because it doesn't make any sense.
They realize that that is the magic of it,
that captures the humanity
of these characters,
that they are unpredictable,
they change throughout time.
There's a bunch of contradictions.
On which point I gotta ask,
is there a case to be made
that "Brothers Karamazov"
is the greatest book ever written?
- Yeah. There is a case
to be made for that.
I don't know. Is it better
than "Crime and Punishment"?
- Yes. Yeah.
- You think so?
Why do you, I'm not arguing with it.
Why do you think that?
- Well, every book is a personal...
Some of my best friends
are inside that book.
- [Jordan] Yeah. It's an amazing book.
There's no doubt about it.
- I think some books
are defined by your personal
relationship with them
and that one was definitive.
And I almost graduated to that one
because for the longest time,
"The Idiot" was my favorite book of all
because I identified with the ideas
represented by Prince Myshkin.
I also identified-
- Ah, that's interesting.
- To Prince Myshkin a human being.
- The holy fool.
- The fool, yeah,
because the world kind of my whole life
still kind of saw me in my perception,
in my narrow perception
as kind of the fool and I,
different from the interpretation
that a lot of people take of this book,
I see him as a kind of hero.
- Oh, definitely.
- To be a naive,
quote, unquote, fool,
but really just a naive optimist
and naive in the best possible way.
I do believe that-
- That's childlike.
- Yeah. Childlike is a better,
so naive is usually seen as-
- That's childish. Naive.
- Yeah. But childlike.
- That's why no one enters
the kingdom of heaven
unless they become like a child.
That's Prince Myshkin.
Dostoevsky knew that.
So that's why you liked "The
Idiot." That's so interesting.
See, I think I like "Crime and Punishment"
because while you identified with Myshkin
I think I identified more with Raskolnikov
'cause I was tempted by
Luciferian intellect, you know,
in a manner very similar to
the manner he was tempted.
But I mean, I think you can make a case
that "The Brothers Karamazov"
is Dostoevsky's crowning achievement.
- Well.
- And that's something, man.
He ruined literature for me.
(Lex chuckles)
'Cause everything else just
fell insipid afterwards.
- Yeah.
- Not everything.
Not everything.
I found some books that in my experience
hit that pinnacle.
"The Master and Margarita."
That's a deadly book. I've
read that I think four times.
And I still, there's still,
it's unbelievably deep.
There's a Nikos
Kazantzakis, a Greek writer.
Some of his books are...
His writing is amazing as well.
- Did you ever connect with the literary
like existentialist Camus
or people like Hermann Hesse
or even Kafka?
- Yeah.
- Did you ever connect with those?
- To the same degree?
- Yeah. To the same-
- Enough to be an influence.
You know, you have to be deaf
in some fundamental sense
not to encounter a great dead friend
and fail to learn, you know?
And I mean, I tried to separate
the wheat from the chaff
when I read, you know, and I
read all the great clinicians.
All of them, perhaps not.
Those who are foremost in the pantheon.
And I tried to pull out what
I could and that was a lot.
I learned a lot from Freud.
I learned a lot from Rogers.
And I learned a lot from, well,
from Dostoevsky and Nietzsche.
I'm gonna do a course on
Dostoevsky and Nietzsche
for this Peterson Academy.
This is coming up in January.
- Oh, that'll be them together.
- [Jordan] I'm really
looking forward to it.
- You're weaving...
- I hadn't thought about
doing them together.
- Oh.
- That'd be fun.
That's a good idea.
- Well-
- That'd be a good idea.
(Lex laughing)
I'll steal that idea.
- No. No. (laughing)
You often weave them
together really masterfully
because there is religious
in the broad sense of that word themes
throughout the writing of both.
- Yeah, well, there is
uncanny parallelisms
in their writing and their lives.
So.
And Dostoevsky's deeper than Nietzsche
but that's because he
was a writer of fiction.
- Well, Nietzsche is almost a character
in a Dostoevsky novel.
- He is definitely that.
He is definitely that. Yes.
And apparently Nietzsche
knew more about Dostoevsky
than people had thought.
There's been some recent
scholarship on that ground.
Dostoevsky didn't know
anything about Nietzsche
as far as I know.
I could be wrong about that.
But the thing that
Dostoevsky had over Nietzsche
is Nietzsche had to make
things propositional
in some real sense, 'cause
he was a philosopher
and it's hard to propositionalize things
that are outside your can,
but you can characterize them.
And so in "The Brothers Karamazov"
Ivan is a more developed
character than Alyosha.
In the explicit sense, he
can make better arguments,
but Alyosha wins like Myshkin
because he's the better man.
and Dostoevsky can show
that in the actions.
He can't render it entirely propositional,
but that's probably because what's good
can't be rendered entirely proposition.
And so Dostoevsky had
that edge over Nietzsche.
Well, Ivan is this brilliant
rationalist atheist,
materialist, and puts forward
an argument on that front
that's still unparalleled
as far as I'm concerned,
and overwhelms Alyosha who cannot respond,
but Alyosha is still the better man.
Which is very interesting, you know?
- Well, you know the funny thing about
those two characters is
you, Jordan Peterson,
seem to be somebody that at least in part
embodies both because you
are one of the intellectuals
of our time, rigorous and thought,
but also are able to have that kind of,
what would you describe?
If you remove the religiosity of Alyosha,
there's what's a good word?
Love towards the world.
- Spirit of encouragement.
- Yes. (laughing)
Hmm.
Yeah, well, it's, you know,
one of the things I did learn perhaps
from looking into the abyss
to the degree that I have had to,
or was willing to was that at some level
you have to make a fundamental
statement of faith.
When God creates the world after each day,
he says he saw that it was good.
You think, well, is it good?
It's like, well, there's a tough question.
I mean, you know, do
you wanna bring a child
into a world such as this,
which is a fundamental question
of whether or not it's good.
It's an act of faith to
declare that it's good
because the evidence is ambivalent.
- Yeah.
- And so then you think,
okay, well,
am I gonna act as if it's good?
And what would happen if I did?
And maybe the answer to that
is I think this is the answer.
The more you act out the
proposition that it's good,
the better it gets.
Dostoevsky said this is something else.
Every man is not only responsible
for everything he does,
but for everything everyone else does.
It's like, what, is that
profound or are you just insane?
Then you think
is what you receive back
proportionate to what you deliver?
And the answer to that might be yes.
That's a terrifying idea, man.
And it's certainly,
you can see that it's true in some sense,
because people certainly respond to you
in kind with how you treat them.
That's certainly the case.
- I mean, it's terrifying
and it's exciting.
- Yeah. Right?
(Lex chuckles)
But that's an adventure, isn't it?
- You, yeah.
You create the world
by the way you live it.
The world you experience is defined
by the way you live that world.
And that's really interesting.
And then taken as a collective,
we create the world together in that way.
- Yeah.
- What do you think
is the meaning of it all?
What's the meaning of
life, Jordan Peterson?
We've defined it many, many times
throughout this conversation
- It's the adventure along the route, man.
And I would say where's
that adventure to be found?
In faith.
What's the faith?
The highest failure is love
and truth is it's hand maiden.
That's a statement of faith. Right?
'Cause you can't tell.
You have to act it out
to see if it's true.
- Yeah.
- And so you can't
even find out without,
and that's so peculiar.
You have to make the commitment a priory.
- Yeah.
- It's like a marriage.
It's the same thing.
It's like, well, is
this the person for me?
Well, that's the wrong question.
How do I find out if this
is the person for me?
By binding myself to them.
Well, maybe the same
thing's true of life. Right?
You bind yourself to it.
And the tighter you bind yourself to it,
the more you find out what it is,
and that's like a radical embrace.
And it's a really radical embrace.
That's the crucifix symbol.
And more than that, because like I said,
the full passion story isn't death.
It isn't even unjust death.
It isn't even unjust death
and the crucifixion of the innocent,
which is really getting pretty bad.
It's unjust, torturous,
innocent death
attendant upon betrayal and
tyranny followed by hell.
Well, that's a hell of a
thing to radically embrace.
It's like bring it on.
- I think a lot of people put
truth as the highest ideal,
and think that can get to that ideal
while living in a place of cynicism
and ultimately escape from life
and hiding from life, afraid of life.
And it's is beautifully put that
love is the highest ideal to reach for.
And truth is-
- It's handmaiden.
I thought about that
for a long time, right?
This hierarchy of ideal.
And the thing about
truth, that bitter truth,
let's say, that cynical truth is
it can break the shackles of naivety.
And actually a burnt cynicism
is a moral improvement
over a blind naivety,
even though one is in some ways positive,
but only because it's protected.
And the other is bitter
and dark, but still better.
But you're not done at that point.
You're just barely started.
It's like you're cynical?
You're not cynical enough.
It's like how cynical are you?
Are you I'm an Auschwitz
prison guard level of cynical?
'Cause you have to go down
pretty deep into the weeds
before you find that part of you,
but you can find it if you want.
And then you think,
well, I wanna stop this.
Well, that was the question
you posed in some sense,
you're obsessed with say what happened
on these mass scale catastrophes
in the communist countries.
It's like, well, millions
of people participated.
So you could've, and maybe
you would've enjoyed it.
So what part of that is you?
And you can find it if you want.
- Yeah. It's all there.
The prisoner, the interrogator.
- [Jordan] The Judas.
(Lex laughing)
Pontius pilot.
- All of it.
- All of it.
- And it's all of it
is inside us.
- Yeah.
- And you just have to
look and once you do,
maybe eventually you can find the love.
Jordan, you're an incredible human being.
I'm deeply honored that
you would talk to me.
Thank you for being a
truth seeker in this world,
and thank you for the love.
- Hey, thanks for the invitation, man.
- Thanks for listening
to this conversation
with Jordan Peterson.
To support this podcast,
please check out our
sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words
from Friedrich Nietzsche.
"You must have chaos within you
to give birth to a dancing star."
Thank you for listening and
hope to see you next time.


how much responsibility do you feel you
have particular guys the alt-right who
has you say
some of them have enjoyed your work and
so i'm not one of i'm not one of you
guys i'm not with you guys they haven't
enjoyed my work
i've definitely read bits on the
internet read more
you've sold 2 million copies of 12 rules
for life you have 800 000 followers on
twitter 1.4 million followers on youtube
what is it that you're selling that so
many people want to buy
i don't think i'm selling anything well
i went to a show where you were
where you were selling tickets to your
show so people are willing to pay a lot
of money to see you speak you know what
is it that you think that people are
hungry for they want to hear from you
they're hungry for a discussion of the
relationship between responsibility and
meaning
and we haven't had that discussion in
our culture for 50 years
we've concentrated on rights and
privileges of freedom and
impulsive pleasure and those are all
useful
in their place but they're shallow and
that's not good
because if people are murdered shallowly
then storms wreck them
and storms come along so i'm talking to
people about
how they can build a foundation
underneath them that works
and and
people need to know that because
otherwise their lives are harder than
they need to be
what is it that you have that no one
else has what are you offering that no
one else is right now
well i think i think that is what i'm
offering that that's not part of the
public discussion
you know and it's grounded in my
clinical knowledge
so i've been a clinician for a very long
time and i'm familiar with the works of
most of the great 20th century
clinicians and a reasonable amount of
philosophy and a good swath of
literature and
i'm a credible scientist and so i can
bring that all together
and i've tried to bring it all together
and to make a case for
the significance of individual life and
the
psychological necessity of courage and
nobility and
responsibility these things that sound
old-fashioned
but are old-fashioned in the best sense
they're old-fashioned because they've
lasted forever and they're absolutely
necessary
and people need a call to responsibility
because they need to mature
they need to want to be adults you know
and
i don't think we do a very good job in
our culture of making a case for why
it's a good thing to be an adult
and two things really made you famous
which is first of all is the book 12
rules for life the second one i think
was an interview that went viral with
kathy newman of
of channel 4 news which she talked about
women
right he's got a big big following but
that was i think really fascinating that
interview because it was specifically
about
men and women and you said at the time
you know youtube sku's very male and
your fan base is very male
is that still the case are you still
mostly primarily talking to men
um i would say the talks are probably
60 40 65 35 male to female
the book sales i don't know i doubt it
because usually it's women who buy books
although men do buy
non-fiction if they buy books we don't
know the demographics on the books
but the book has definitely expanded my
audience i would say um
and that's a good thing as far as i'm
concerned i mean i never set out
specifically to talk to men
my students for most years at university
have been primarily female
i think most of my graduate students
have been female it might be about 50 50
but i think it would probably tilt more
in the direction of female
so it wasn't like it wasn't something i
set out to do
i think though that as i said earlier
well i can't tell how much of it is
merely a consequence of the fact that
youtube skews so male
it might also be something to do with
the call to take on voluntary
responsibility
i'm not exactly sure why that would be
more necessary for men right now i think
it might be because
our culture confuses men's desire for
achievement and competence with
the patriarchal desire for tyrannical
power
and that's a big mistake those aren't
the same thing even a bit
so and it's very inappropriate
psychologically and sociologically to
confuse them
so well one of the things i want to come
back to is this idea so that you say in
the book you know there is masculine
order
and feminine chaos that's no actually i
say that those are symbolic
representations of the two things
right okay so why why is order masculine
um i think it's because our primary
social hierarchy structures are
fundamentally masculine
and that's not the patriarchy well
it's not the modern idea of the
patriarchy that's for sure i mean so
that's my idea of the patriarchy which
is
a system of male dominance of society
yeah but that's not my sense of the
patriarchy so
what's yours well in what sense is our
society male
dominated uh the fact that the vast
majority of wealth is owned by men the
vast majority of
capital and is owned by men women do
more unpaid labor very tiny
proportion of men and a huge proportion
of people who are
seriously disaffected are men most
people in prison are men
most people who are on the street or men
most victims of violent crime are men
most people who commit suicide are men
most men most people who die in wars are
men
people who do worse in school are men
it's like
where's the dominance here precisely
what you're doing is you're taking a
tiny
substrata of hyper successful men and
using that to represent the entire
structure
of the of western society there's
nothing about that that's vaguely
appropriate
but i could say equally what the most
rape victims are women terrible things
happen to people of both sexes
and you could say that with with perfect
utility but that doesn't provide any
evidence for the existence of a
male-dominated patriarchy
well that just means the terrible things
happen to both genders which they
certainly do
but there are almost no women who rape
men for example so that is an
asymmetry there in sexual violence well
yes there's an ace there's an asymmetry
in all sorts of places
but that doesn't mean that western
culture is a male-dominated patriarchy
the fact that there are asymmetries has
nothing to do with your basic argument
no but you might say this is a trope
that people just accept
western society is a male-dominated
patriarchy it's like no it's not
that's not true and and even if it even
if it has a
patriarchal structure to some degree the
uh
the fundamental basis of that structure
is not power
it's competence that's why our society
works
it's only when as when a structure
degenerates into tyranny that the
fundamental
relationships between people become
dependent on power
it's not power if you hire a plumber
who's likely to be male it's not because
there's roving bands of tyrannical
plumbers forcing you to make that choice
and it's the case with almost every
interaction that you have at the face of
our culture
you're dealing with people who are
offering a service of one form or
another
who are usually part of the broad middle
class and who offer
and what you're looking for is the
person who can offer the best service
and you can find it
it's not a consequence of being
dominated by anything that's tyrannical
and and then again our culture or
western culture
which is by no means perfect and
certainly has tyrannical elements like
all cultures do
is the least tyrannical society that's
ever been produced and certainly the
least tyrannical society that exists now
so where's the patriarchy exactly and
all of them well saying that it's the
least tyrannical society's not the same
as saying it's not a tyrannical society
that's exactly why i said it was the
least tyranny but that's what i mean so
you haven't debunked the existence of
patriarchy then you've said that
actually now is better
you don't have to debunk women to
demonstrate its existence okay well
let's go through it i'm writing a book
about feminism in the moment uh
until 1919 there were professions that
women were barred from they simply were
not allowed to do it
until 1880 why would you blame men for
that because
who was in those professions who was
guarding entry to those professions who
was worried about losing their status if
women became
doctors that emancipated women in the
20th century just out of curiosity well
a couple of different things i think it
was technology i think it was the pill
helped enormously because
when was that development in the 60s
right so that wasn't 1919.
no but i also think it was a series of
legal changes that started in britain
with the married women's property act
which said for the first time women are
full legal beings under the law they can
own property
and that to me is a structure that has
continued throughout from a time when
women didn't have the same legal rights
as men to now when they mostly do
but culture still lags behind it i don't
think you and i are necessarily talking
at such cross purposes it's just that
your conception of patriarchy i see it
in the book is that quite a lot of men
are quite nice and they do nice things
for women
no that's not my conception of
patriarchy and i don't require men or
advise them to be nice well you do talk
about the guy who's the tampon king the
sanitary towel king of india right i
wouldn't call that nice
okay brave okay did you read about his
life when he was trying to develop that
yeah god it was absolutely miserable and
he did it anyways
we freed all sorts of women as a
consequence and i think that was nice
that's courageous that's noble that's
visionary
it's not nice i think it is all so nice
i think it is also something that is
recent you know it is honoring your
social obligations
um i'm not so sure that that's a social
obligation because many other people
would have done it had it been a social
obligation
he said what he was concerned about he
saw that his wife was suffering with her
monthly period and had to choose between
feeding her family
and taking care of herself properly and
chose to feed her family and thought he
would do something about that
that goes way past nice especially given
what he had to suffer through to
do all the experimentation that produced
his his eventual technology
so like i this whole patriarchy thing i
think you have no idea how pernicious
and dangerous it is
well no i don't i really don't go
throughout history have fundamentally
cooperated
to push back against the absolute
catastrophe of existence
a terrible death rate the probability of
chronic starvation
early death disease the difficulty of
raising children
with all the death that was associated
with that and to
look backwards in time and say well
basically what happened was
men took the upper hand and persecuted
women in this tyrannical patriarchy it's
absolutely dreadful misreading of
history it's a terrible
thing to teach young women and it's a
horrible thing to inflict upon men
i mean i absolutely disagree with you i
think that's like saying
slavery in the us was actually most
people cooperate well no you didn't you
had a system where one set of people
owned another set of people
and until women got full legal rights
they could own property for themselves
they could work essentially they were
owned they were first
owned by their fathers and then by the
status
to the domination by men and he said
that you thought that what emancipated
women primarily in the 20th century
was technological revolution no not
primarily but that's one of two i think
that's two things primarily
no i think the pill was a primary force
in the emancipation of women i think
of tampons let's say or the or the
provision of proper sanitary uh
facilities toilets and that sort of
thing you're
you're thinking instead it was the
action of courageous feminists in the
1920s that produced a social revolution
that overthrew the patriarchy that's
your theory
yeah that's a foolish theory well i'm
very sorry to hear you say that but i
think
you in the kathy newman interview i
think it's a multivariate right i think
there are lots of different things that
all contributed to well then let's
be assuming that the western society was
a tyrannical patriarchy
that's one of them and then other things
happened as well so you have the pill
you have the dishwasher and white goods
labor-saving devices in the home i think
all of those were really important
but you also have things like campaigns
for the vote yes you also have things
like that
yes so how when in a system that existed
in england until 1918 went home why
would you even want to look at history
like that
like what what's your what's your goal
because i think the people who don't
look at history are condemned to repeat
it and i think that we are
going to what are we going to do repeat
the the persecution of women
do you think that's a realistic
possibility yeah we're sitting here you
see that we're sitting here in america
right where we've just had a fifth judge
appointed to the supreme court who is
now
anti-abortion is now conservative i
think that abortion rights are actually
fundamental to women being able to
function as full humans in society
and i think that is now under threat in
america i think it is extremely
smug and complacent to think
civilization has peaked it's all upwards
from here
yeah well um good luck with that
it's a living like you know i there are
lots of people who agree with me there
are lots of people clearly who agree
with you
um i want to know they're just a lot of
people i would say
who are coming to listen to what i say
because they're sick and tired of having
their
desire to move forward in the world and
to achieve something
and to take their place as adult males
let's say
who are under the weight of accusations
that their
ambition and forthrightness is a
manifestation of something that's
fundamentally tyrannical
they're not happy with that it's not
doing anyone any good and it's also
not true it's really a terrible thing to
do
to young men and it's happening all the
time that's why they're bailing out of
universities like mad
there won't be a man left in the social
sciences in 10 years in the universities
and it's no bloody wonder
it's an inhospitable place and it's
unhospitable
precisely because of this doctrine said
that throughout history the fundamental
relationship between men and women was
one of power essentially slavery it's
like
fine believe it if you want it's not
going to do your relationships any good
i can tell you that
so okay well we'll we'll see how that
one goes i'm currently married but you
know i'll i'll raise it with him
um i think the university's example is a
really fascinating one because you talk
in the book about the fact that now
women
are a majority on two-thirds of college
courses in the us
uh and you know i've also seen you
saying would you believe in a quality of
opportunity but not a qualitative
outcome
maybe that i don't believe in equality
of outcome i think it's an unbelievably
pathological wish and doctrine right
it's
very dangerous history has demonstrated
exactly how dangerous it is
equality of opportunity is something
that anyone with any sense would support
but equality of outcome it's so what's
your problem with their notifications
beyond belief to to to support equality
of outcomes okay so what's your problem
with there not being enough men in the
social sciences
perhaps women are just clever perhaps
that's why there are more women at
university right under your doctrine i
don't think that but that's what i think
the logical extent of your doctor
isn't the fact that there's an unequal
distribution the problem i have with it
is that the reason that men are bailing
out is because of the prevalence of the
doctrine that you're espousing
that's the problem i have with it it
doesn't matter that much they will bail
out i don't see any way that the
universities are going to redeem
themselves in the next decade
so and and maybe that will be fine but i
doubt it
let's see that seems extremely
pessimistic when the majority the
numbers of people going to university
just generally are going up
yeah well that's not going to last for
very long why not because it's too
expensive and the universities are doing
all sorts of things that
aren't um acceptable mostly racking up
the price ratcheting up the price
so and and decreasing the quality of
what they're offering and
playing into the hands of the people who
are ideological acolytes of the identity
politics routines and
playing post-modern stunts and pushing
neo-marxism and all these things that
are characteristic of
of the social sciences and the
humanities primarily see this is where i
find
you you fascinating to me because you
know you talk in these
quite apocalyptic terms i think that you
know someone will listen to that and
think
wow there's a really big problem but
what we're really talking about is
some irritatingly post-modern professors
and some students with blue hair and
funny ideas about gender
in a handful of courses around america
that's what we were talking about no one
would have paid attention to me for more
than about 15 minutes
so you might see this as some surface
manifestation that's irrelevant but that
isn't how most people view it
certainly the case too that this
identity politics
battle of ideas was a determining factor
in the last american election
if hillary wouldn't have played identity
politics played cozy with the identity
politics type she would have kept the
working class and she would be president
now
so these aren't trivial issues by any
stretch of the imagination it's not just
some kids having
a decent time while they're being
creatively rebellious at university
it's a much deeper problem than that the
doctrine
the doctrines that i'm opposed to
are predicated on well one assumption
they're predicated on it's probably the
primary assumption is that
the best way to view history is as the
domination of a tyrannical male
patriarchy and that's true also
particularly of the west which is a
doctrine i find absolutely unpalatable
and historically absurd biologically
ridiculous
and ungrateful among other things who's
ungrateful sorry in that who is being
ungrateful
look at what you have i live in the best
society that's ever been created you
know i was reading about
some indians do you mean me as a woman
or me as a 21st century person
in in the world i mean us yeah i mean
i'm incredibly grateful for what i have
but
to me the project is politics it's
construction of a tyrannical patriarchy
you're grateful for the productions of a
tyrannical patriarchy how does that make
sense
because i think life is good i think it
could be better that that's that's
what's being
progressing but i guess that isn't
commensurate with your claim that you're
the beneficiary of the tyrannical
patriarchy
why not how can it be good if it's the
consequence of a tyrannical
patriarchy tyranny isn't good is it i
mean that's the definition of tyranny
something that isn't good and yet it's
produced all these things that you're
grateful for
like doesn't that contradict in
contradiction bother you where did where
did what was good
come from where is well i think from i
think i'm benefiting actually from a lot
of things that i don't
support that are unearned privileges in
my life i think that's absolutely
like your job like i have a very good
job i had a loving family
who i don't think that's going to do the
world any good is it that's a hell of a
fine rationalization
for your privileged position oh well
fair enough but like you know if you
could trade it off with someone who's
less privileged
i could be a start i could i could do
that and and
but i don't i don't want to and i won't
and i don't think i should be expected
to why not is it okay for you to occupy
a position of privilege in the
patriarchal tyranny and if it is is it
because you're female
or is it just because it's convenient
let me tell you my political philosophy
i'm
i guess i'm a social democrat so what i
believe is that you
should if you have a good life you
should try and pass that on i believe in
a progressive redistributive tax system
for example
it was once said by lord mandelson in
british politics you know but new labor
was
okay with people being filthy rich as
long as they pay their taxes now i'm
kind of less okay with people being
filthy rich
well that i think i would leave that
you're probably in the top one tenth of
one percent of people who've ever lived
on the planet
that would constitute filthy rich by
historical standards okay but i'm not
sure where that
is in the line exactly be able to help
the neanderthals at this point
really by giving up some money but this
is my point is that what i believe is
and i believe in a structure in which
people who have had a good life and had
lots of advantages should
pay that back pay that forwards which i
think is the message that you preach as
well right you have responsibilities
and if you've had like us a very lot of
advantages
civilization has a tyrannical patriarchy
well it's not purely a tyrannical thing
that's for sure it isn't it's purely not
right and that's exactly the issue but
why would you describe it as a
tyrannical patriarchy then you make a
case that it's purely that
and that's exactly what's ungrateful
it's not purely that at all why is
saying that something has elements of
this
same as it is purely that isn't what's
being said merely to define it as a
patriarchy
implies unit unit unit dimensionality
and to insist that that's also
tyrannical doesn't offer a balanced
viewpoint at all
well i think that's probably where yeah
i think that's probably where your
disagreement comes with this which is
because i do not see it
in that way i do not see that it is
univariate at all i see it as one
why call it a patriarchy because it
describes an overarching
structure does it and what if the
patriarch is fundamentally composed of
women is it still a patriarchy that
would be a matriarchy
would it so let's say we take a
patriarchal structure like the medical
profession
and we fill it primarily with women is
it then a matriarchal structure
what makes it a patriarch to begin with
is it the hierarchical structures that
is it the fact that it's mostly men
is it the sociological structure or is
it the fact that it's mostly men well i
think that's really interesting because
male primary school teachers for example
only 15
of them are men and i interviewed some
of them for my book and you know what
they report exactly the same things that
women do in male-dominated offices right
they say
people have conversations that i feel
excluded from i feel stigmatized like i
shouldn't be here
people look at me askance when i say i'm
a primary school teacher and i'm a man
you know they kind of
reel back we all make those implicit
associations so so if it is
if it is a structure that's dominated by
women then it's also a tyrannical
patriarchy i think in that case then men
have a way
they should be able to complain about
the fact that a very female dominated
office leaves them feeling out too yeah
i'm
really feeling left out so how do we get
something that isn't a tyrannical
patriarchy
if it's composed of women and it's a
tyrannical patriarchy and if it's
composed of men it's a tyrannical
patriarchy we're kind of out of options
right but well or you could have a blend
an office in which a blend of people
have both
so if it's 50 50 then it's not a
tyrannical picture no not 50 50. i'm
saying that
40 60. i'm saying that there is clearly
when there's only 15
of male parameters which is they do feel
marginalized and excluded so
so you think the defining hallmark of a
tyrannical social structure is the
predominance of one gender and if that
was
if that was relatively equalized then
all of a sudden it would be a free
and an open institution i don't think
that the male primary teachers being
tyrannized i do think they are being
marginalized and i do think that they
feel
excluded and stressed well this is what
i mean i think actually and i'm i'm
surprised you don't agree with me on
this that actually having more male
primary school teachers would be a
really good thing because boys need role
models
actually people particularly boys who
don't have a father figure in their life
that's really important
to have a stable adult who shows them
what it's like to be a man around the
place
could be but you shouldn't achieve it as
a consequence of preferential hiring
no i don't necessarily need to be
preferential hiring i think it would
nest it would probably be about making
that
job breaking down the stigma to entering
that job i think teaching is a really
interesting example it was seen at the
time
when i was 18 19 right there were no men
in it and how did that make you feel
i loved it yeah you know the kids i used
to wrestle with the kids which of course
can't do now because
everybody knows that that would just be
a catastrophe and i used to draw them
pictures of monsters and they'd line up
for that
and i liked working with kids quite a
lot and i didn't care whether it was
female dominate i've been in female
dominated my professions my whole life
right i think it felt marginalized as a
consequence well then you have been
lucky and i i have talked to people
who might be like the opposite right be
careful conduct as well
explain that more to me well why would
you assume that it would be luck
well if i say that you know there is a
statistical analysis and i've talked to
a broad range of people and you know you
would always expect outliers at either
end some people have had a really
terrible time some people have had a
really brilliant time
everybody else the things that i strive
to do is not to become resentful
well okay that's very good i have to say
that your twitter feed does not
give me that impression you come across
as somebody who takes criticism very
much to heart
is that true i don't think you have any
grounds for that
suggestion i mean you've seen my
interviews online if i was someone who
took criticism at heart i'd be in a lot
more trouble than i am now
in what way well i've been criticized
endlessly for
two years i've been in scandals i've
probably been in i don't know how many
scandals in the last two years
and had unbelievably contentious
interviews with journalists online
on tv on radio in podcasts if i was
someone who
couldn't tolerate criticism the evidence
for that would already be clear
twitter's a strange social network i've
kind of pulled myself away from it
so it's not an easy place to conduct
yourself with
as much grace as you might and i think
it's
it sort of rewards impulsivity because
it's
maybe it's because of the constraint on
on characters
or something like that so i think that
people tend to show their worst on
twitter and and
and some of that's a consequence of the
of the structure of the technology
i think i certainly agree with you i
think that's something that we agree on
there i think people are really at their
best
on twitter no and you know i pulled
myself away from it quite a lot in the
last month
um mostly for to see
why you know i kind of kept an eye on
twitter all the social medias
media networks for the last few years
partly to see
well i'm trying to monitor what's
happening around me i suppose
is probably the right way of thinking
about and to see
if i'm making mistakes and how they
might be rectified
but i don't think twitter's been good
for me
and i don't think it's i don't think the
reply function on twitter is useful and
i think the fact that so many people
on twitter are anonymous is not a good
thing at all
do you think you'd be less angry if you
weren't on twitter that's something i
think quite a lot
i mean just i would be coming to contact
with less things that annoyed me on a
daily basis
oh i think there's no doubt about that
yeah yeah
i i think that's definitely the case and
i've talked to other people who've
pulled back from twitter and experienced
the same thing
i don't know what it is exactly but
there's a there's something about
twitter that seems to really
heighten the desire of people to be
provocative
and maybe it's the case that only people
who are feeling irritable
respond you know we don't know you know
like if you put up a post
and a thousand people read it certainly
a thousand people don't respond
a few people respond well maybe maybe
it's skews way over to those people who
had a bad day
like we have no idea right because it's
a communication channel
that no one understands we're not
evolved to understand it we're not
evolved to use it
we don't we can't interpret it plus
you're interacting with random strangers
which is something you never
ever do and it's never the same set of
random strangers and
you don't react to twitter like it's
random strangers
you rack to twitter like it's a person
that you know
and it isn't you write in 12 rules for
life about having had
violent impulses that you didn't act on
and i think in maps of meaning you
elaborate on that you say you've
fantasized about stabbing a classmate in
the neck and you say
you're very clear about the fact that
you you know you never ever thought you
would take those seriously but
it just does make me think whether or
not are you somebody who
thrives on anger who finds anger to be
something that they need in their life
that they find
motivates them to do the things that
they need to do those are two different
questions
okay you can answer them both one is
whether i thrive on it and the answer to
that is most certainly not
so i actually don't like conflict then
how have you ended up doing this as a
job
which is arguing with people right just
because you no that's not my job
it's not to argue with people okay
so my job is to not do things that i
don't think i should do
right and my government made the mistake
of assuming that compelled speech was
acceptable as long as motivated by
hypothetical compassion
and that's not happened for me so i made
that point
it wasn't because i wanted to or because
i enjoyed it i don't really like
conflict i'm actually a rather agreeable
person which is partly why i'm a
clinician
and so i find the the constant conflict
exhausting but that's not the issue i'm
you're not morally obligated you're
morally obligated to do things
other than that which you like so now i
really do enjoy the lecture series that
i'm doing
and the reason for that is that it's not
political
in its essence i'm trying to
do everything i can to bring people who
are trying to develop a vision for their
life
together and to encourage them to
act more responsibly but but not in a
finger wagging sort of way
but because i've come to understand that
the meaning that sustains you in life is
mostly to be found through
responsibility
and through the voluntary adoption of
responsibility you're very likely to
find your fundamental strength and i
think that that's
clinically unassailable observation
and so and that's all very good and i'm
very pleased to be doing it and it seems
to be having a salutary effect as far as
i can tell
and but but it's not because i thrive on
anger i mean you were at my show what to
on thursday night yeah how much anger
was there in that well i thought it was
fascinating because
it was in long island um i drove we
drove to it and we went past a
lamborghini dealership
a porsche dealership this is not a poor
area the audience was i would say
very like as i was surprised how many
women there was pretty mixed it was
overwhelmingly white and i thought you
talked
uh you know you said at the end i was
more incoherent than i normally am you
ranged across quite a
range of subjects from you know status
in monkeys to
perception but the things that the crowd
clapped and they applauded
when you went oh you can't say that
that's a microaggression or
multiculturalism is a you know it's a
scourge that is sweeping canada
and what i got was a strong sense that
has swept canada okay
well what i got was a very strong sense
of people whose lives i never said that
it was a scourge that swept
canada either i wouldn't have said that
okay well certainly i will go back and
check your exact wording what you said
but you definitely
i'm not in favor of it as a fundamental
doctrine right
i don't think it's a scourge so i wonder
if you and i mean the same thing when we
talk about multiculturalism because you
have
a first nations room in your house right
you have a lot of first nation stuff
how is the co-existence of the honorary
member of a first nations family as a
matter
which wonderful i have a uh a first
nations artist and when i'm from when i
went to canada last year
but that to me is the essence of
canadian multiculturalism living
that culture being preserved and living
alongside the anglophone culture that
in some senses supplanted it how is that
not multiculturalism
well multiculturalism is the idea that
the cultures can all be put together in
a single place with no overarching
structure
or undergirding structures like that's
not the case how can that possibly be
the case
that defines the situation in the world
and the world is full of
war so how does how can that possibly
work
if you're going to bring people together
and they're going to be
and they're going to exist together in
harmony they have to be playing
a game that everyone plays that everyone
knows the rules for
it can't be 10 different sets of rules
for different people that isn't going to
work so it's absolutely naive to believe
how if that worked the world wouldn't be
full of
war well before we had you know
multiculturalism we still did have
war war in fact war isn't as stephen
pinker i'm sure you've read your stephen
finger says you know this is the least
violent time in human history so
something that's a consequence of
working tyranny well
if you think the patriarchy has been
eroded over the last hundred years maybe
that's what it's down to
maybe you could give some credit to it
for that i actually didn't say that the
patriarchy had been eroded
well you know because you don't believe
it existed in the first place fair
enough but
i my definition of multiculturalism is
citizenship based right so you can be
both canadian and first nations you can
be both
quebecois and also canadian uh you know
but that means that everybody in the
multicultural milieu
is one thing and another right they're
all one
thing and another yeah yeah well you
know our
prime minister said well there is no
canadian identity it's like
well okay what is it that unites us well
nothing we all protect our cultures it's
like well
that leads to war okay that doesn't only
lead to war obviously
but unless you have people operating
within a shared framework of perception
and value they can't
cooperate and compete peacefully
there's i don't understand how that's
even a disputable
topic that's how you organize people
okay i think
if that's what he said that's what
trudeau said that is a dumb thing for
the prime minister of canada to say when
you are prime minister of canada
yeah you might you might say that i
would agree much more with what barack
obama said when he said you know i'm
trying not to make her red states
america or blue states america white
america blackmail i'm trying to make a
united states america and that to me
the democrats are very good at that well
they've
tried identity politics for the last 20
years all they've done is
inflamed tribal tribal tendencies as far
as i can tell
so he can say that but it isn't obvious
that it's the case and it's not obvious
to me at all that one of the
consequences of barack obama's
presidency
was a reduction in racial tension in the
united states no i wouldn't agree with
that either i think a lot of people
found
having a black college-educated
professor very alarming and threatening
to their
idea to stop them from voting for him
twice
no that is very true but again it's
fundamentally true right it's really the
crucial issue at hand here no but he
built a big coalition of
white well-educated liberals and people
of color i mean that is that that is the
democrat election how do you explain the
rise of racial tension in the united
states then
well i think it's caused by a lot of
things not at least in one of which is
the republican party in flaming it you
talk about the left playing identity
politics i think the right play identity
politics all the time
the right doesn't dominate the
universities no but it dominates
but donald trump is president so
realistically trump is hardly a typical
republican
no he i would say that he commented for
most of his life if i remember correctly
he was a democrat right i don't think he
has anything
to blame donald trump okay but i'm going
to say the rest of the republican party
are also quite happy to play i would say
white identity politics
they go they did not dump him as their
candidate when he said mexicans they're
not sending us their best people here
they're rapists right
the whole idea of the united states it
said i think a beautiful thing
all men are created equal but it meant
men and it meant specifically white men
women and black people could not vote
the u.s was founded on identity politics
this is not some new concept that has
come along in the last 20 years
the united states wasn't founded on
identity yes it was that's
absolutely absurd proposition the united
states was founded on the same
principles that
what would you say that that played
their powerful role
through the development of of of english
democracy and
that was nested inside a judeo-christian
view
that fundamentally presumed that both
men and women were made in the image of
god
and that all people had divine value and
it took a long time for that set of
ideas to fully manifest itself in the
political realm
but to consider that a manifestation of
identity politics is
i i can't imagine why you would possibly
do that i don't consider that a
manifestation of identity politics i
consider having a constitution that says
only some people are citizens to be a
manifestation of identity politics
well what do you think changed it across
time and then
look let's get our definition straight
here you can't
lump all occurrences of
non-equal treatment into the category of
identity politics identity politics is a
very specific thing
it's really only existed since the 1970s
you can't go back into 1770 and say that
the founders of the american
constitution
were playing identity politics politics
that was based on identity that's my
definition of identity that's not the
definition of identity politics unless
you play
fast and loose with the definition
identity politics is something that's in
no one talked about identity politics 20
years ago or 30 years ago it's a new
term
you you can't say that people's
proclivity to identify
with their group is identity politics
that's just tribalism
and that's like who knows how old that
is a million years old
500 000 years old and you're going to
call tribalism identity politics
well that's not helpful if you want to
talk about tribalism we could talk about
tribalism but identity politics is
something that's
nested inside a particular political
view of the world
it's got a marxist basis and it
manifests itself in post-modernism
and it emerged in the american in france
first in the 1970s
and then has swept through the american
universities and increasingly the rest
of the west since then
that's identity politics if you want to
talk about tribalism that's fine
i'm not a fan of tribalism which is why
i don't like the identity politics types
and i don't care if they're on the right
or the left i think the right
wing use of identity as the primary
marker for human categorization is as
reprehensible and dangerous as it is on
the left
my problem with the left at the moment
the fundamental problem with the radical
left
is that they're hyper dominant in
academia and that's not good
and that's not my opinion you can go
look at jonathan heights data
and see for yourself and he's as
moderate person as you can hope to find
and probably less prone to anger than me
and and i agree with you i find a lot of
students phenomenally irritating but i
would question
how much power they have in contrast to
the things i find more worrying that
happening in the world today right or
even the professors right even
20 year olds don't have that much power
but they're not 20 forever
10 years later they're 30. and 20 years
later they're 40.
right and whatever happens in the
university happens everywhere five years
later
and very very sadly for people in my
politics left-wing politics what happens
to people as they get older is that
they've
traditionally got more conservative so i
don't think you can make a case that the
the current where people are where
they're 20 today is actually going to be
the
ideology that takes them all the way
through their life that's never been the
case
it'll be around long enough to do plenty
of damage like it already is
okay but even if we accept that students
and their pomo professors are quite
annoying which i think is probably i
agree with something
they're not just annoying like they're
destroying the universities and that's
not a good thing and they're
particularly destroying the social
sciences and the humanities
the sciences are safe so far but not for
long
because the scientists in particular are
terrible at politics
and the left-wing activists are great at
politics and so they'll win
eventually the national science
foundation is already
introducing diversity requirements for
hiring in mathematics and universities
it's like good luck with that that's not
going to work
there are hardly any mathematical
geniuses if you start putting all sorts
of arbitrary restrictions on their
hiring you're just going to not and
you're going to end up not finding the
ones that there are so
besides i don't think that's true
actually because if you say there are
very few mathematical genes
well i'm i want next year i'm going to
be a fellow oxford university so i spend
time talking to academics i've talked to
a lot of academics from my book
i do agree with you there is an
illiberal strain that is sweeping
through a lot of universities
i don't think it's an existential threat
and i certainly don't think it is to me
the biggest issue in world politics
today it's the one that i would choose
personally what do you think is the
biggest issue
i think that the rise of strongmen
authoritarians around the world is very
worrying and that's one of the reasons i
find
the subtitle of your book fascinating
because
it's called an antidote to chaos why
isn't it an antidote to order which you
also say in its excessive manifestations
is bad
i've said that well you can't write a
book about everything no no but you've
specifically chosen antidote to chaos so
why is chaos
300 lectures online and i talked plenty
about the pathology of order in those
lectures
okay but i'm just a fan of authoritarian
strong men that's for sure well that's
good but i do think that the way that
you talk about
order in the book is something that
people will take away from it be
specific
okay so let me think um the way that you
talk about natural dominance hierarchies
in lobsters let's get on to the lobsters
because i think that the
the thing that people take away from
that is male lobsters compete
for female lobsters and that says
something about society now that's that
men need to be dominant
in in society because if lobsters do it
then there is something that we can read
about
humans from there's nothing in that
chapter at all
that suggests that the way that men
should succeed in human hierarchies
is a consequence of the exercise of
power there's not one line in that
entire book that's that claims that
because it's not what i believe
most human hierarchies as i already
pointed out are hierarchies of
competence
not power okay so that's why we don't
live in a patriarchal tyranny
and so if you want to be a successful
man then you should be competent
and that will move you up the hierarchy
and that will make you attractive
and for good reason unless you want an
incompetent mate
which is possible and and and
happens but isn't something that i would
recommend people will sometimes
choose an incompetent mate because
they're intimidated by competence
and so they'll settle for someone who
they don't respect
because they feel that they can master
them and they won't be intimidated but
it's not a recipe for a happy life i can
tell you that
so there isn't a line in that chapter
that talks about power as
as as the proper means of conducting
yourself in life there's not a line in
the book and there's nothing in anything
i've ever said that suggests that
okay no i'm sorry but it's really
important because people have read this
chapter
and they make exactly the argument that
you make and it's a misapprehension
so it's a misapprehension of the book
okay but if so many people are getting
the same misappropriation could it be
there are so many people that are
getting it there's two million people
that have bought the book and there's a
very small handful of people who have a
particular ideological perspective
who enjoy developing that perspective
because it indicates just what sort of
reprehensible individual i am but it has
absolutely nothing to do with what i
wrote or what i've said or what i
believe
i don't believe that our fundamental
hierarchies are based on power
i don't believe that the way that you
move up our hierarchies is as a
consequence of manifesting power
it's competence okay my big problem with
the lobsters
is that it's scientifically bollocks
right it's just you cannot read across
from lobsters and what they do to what
humans
can that's why serotonin works on
lobsters but it works in two different
ways so if serotonin makes lobsters more
aggressive it makes them less aggressive
right no that's not right serotonin
makes human beings more dominant but
less aggressive
and the only reason it makes them more
dominant is because they're less
irritable and they're less defensively
aggressive
so it's not bollocks i know my
neurochemistry
so if you're going to play
neurochemistry let's go and do it okay
we'll use the antidepressants work on
lobsters yes they do
we make a lobster that's been defeated
in a fight more likely to fight again
that's not the same mechanism that
happens the same humans because don't
get depressed
as the way that humans are i think
you're anthropomorphizing into a
ridiculous degree
these are creatures that urinate out of
their faces i think that
uh the fundamental issue among um
knowledgeable
uh animal behaviorists is that
anthropomorphization with animals is
generally the appropriate
tactic unless you have reason to doubt
it which is because there's continuity
between us and animals rather than
discontinuity
and the idea that the
anthropomorphization of animals
is inappropriate is something derived
from 1950s behaviorism
the the highly trained affective
neuroscientists and people who study
motivation and emotion as well as
neurochemistry know perfectly well
that there is biological and behavioral
continuity across the animal kingdom
and way down into the kingdom as well
which is exactly why i chose lobsters
to indicate that there is so much
continuity in the systems that
allow us to estimate a status
position that we share it with creatures
that are a third of a billion years old
and the reason that i made that argument
was to
put paid at least into part in part to
the
absurd marxist proposition that
hierarchical structures are
a secondary consequence of western
civilization and free market economies
which is as preposterous a perspective
as you could possibly develop
about anything hierarchies are a third
of a billion years old
you can't blame them on the west or men
or capitalism
and we're wired for hierarchical
perception in ways that you can
hardly possibly imagine even our ability
to rank order a set of objects seems to
be tightly linked
to our ability to assess the relative
status of people in our
in our social uh milieus so and the
biochemistry is very very similar
and the reason we know that is because
most of the drugs that are used on
people are first tested on animals
now it's not often animals as primitive
as lobsters but it is
plenty so a lot of what we know about
neurological structure for example is a
consequence of studying the flat room
worm which is much more primitive
organism than the lobster
continuity is the is the rule okay so
what can we learn from
killer whales that live in matriarchal
pods often led by
a grandmother someone who's been through
a menopause why isn't that an example
that you've picked to talk about in the
book
it's because lobsters say the thing that
ideologically you want to talk about
which is your belief
that there is a kind of marxist ideology
you say that the point that i was making
the point that i was making with
lobsters
i just said what it was that hierarchies
have been for
around forever who genuinely really
today is arguing apart from maybe three
mad marxist academics that there is no
such thing as hierarchy hierarchies
they're not they're not arguing that
there's no such thing as hierarchy oh
there should be no such thing as
hierarchies
oh there's plenty of them are arguing
really because i see that
almost never in the wild as an argument
i see people think that hierarchy should
be based on merit and they should be
more what do you call the demand for
equality of outcome is if it's not an
attempt to flatten hierarchies
or to to eliminate them what else could
it possibly be
and you don't think the neo-marxists and
the post-modernists think that hierarchy
is a social construction
okay you're not talking about the same
people that i know that's for sure
everything is a social construction for
the social constructionists
including hierarchies but i just don't
think that is a very widely held view in
the world it might be
liberalized 20 percent of social
scientists identify as marxist
and and where's that statistic from look
it up and
look it up in in heights work okay you
know i know i mean i'm interested i
don't know i've checked it out quite
yeah yeah but i'm just
i'm a perfectly valid statistic i don't
have the reference at hand
so it's one in five okay and there the
the number of conservatives or even
liberals for that matter
in the social sciences and humanities is
not only vanishingly small but getting
smaller
and you think the social
constructionists believe that hierarchy
is built into biology
they're not very good social
constructionists if that was if that's
what they believe
and the post-modernists and the
neo-marxists are radical social
constructionists
because they wouldn't believe that human
beings are infinitely malleable and
and and that we can be recreated in in
whatever image the ideologues
might want to recreate us in if they
didn't think that and it's much more
prevalent than you're
admitting i mean there these there isn't
a competing position on campuses except
among the evolutionary biologists and
the evolutionary psychologists let's say
and they're under complete attack
they're certainly next on the chopping
block as far as i can tell i've been
warning them for the last two years
social constructionists don't like
evolutionary psychologists and they
don't like biology
and i i really don't understand why
except that it interferes with this idea
that human beings are infinitely
malleable
and stops them from being able to blame
hierarchy on the west
look if you're really concerned about
the poor
as a as a social democrat let's say the
first thing you should do is abandon
your presupposition that the
dispossession produced by hierarchies is
a consequence of the patriarchal
structure of the west
it's a way deeper problem than that so
there have been
we've been dispossessed forever way
before capitalism
okay i think i would agree with that so
if if it is a way deeper problem than
that how do you tackle it
i don't know well that's a bit i mean
that for someone who's intelligent you
just throw their hands up and go
maybe something there's lots of things i
don't know how to tackle i don't know
how to tackle the fact that people
range range extremely widely in their
cognitive ability either
these are big problems right but we can
start with a redistributive tax policy
right where people who earn a lot pay
more tax than people lower down the
income scale to redistribute income that
was a fairly obvious
way that you could make poor people less
poor it's something that you know the
labor government did they
almost i think they have child poverty
it is possible to do things and we do
have mechanisms well i wouldn't i
wouldn't
uh make the immediate uh presumption
that it was the redistributive tax
policy that have child poverty you know
that absolute poverty in the world has
halved between near 2000 and 2012 and
you can't attribute that to
redistributive policies no i can't i'm
only talking about britain i'm talking
about that particular government which
had you know
then there are fiscal analysis that have
been done but i think um
let's move on from from lobsters i mean
you know
that chapter is about people becoming
responsible and competent
not about them becoming like dominant
and powerful
okay not that at all but my problem is i
think you got criticized by a lot of
marine biologists right and by a lot of
geneticists
okay well i can name it pz myers is one
who's criticized you um adam rutherford
who's former editor of nature has
criticized that chapter
there are you know that is not but one i
think biologists
dispute the fact that most or organisms
organize themselves into hierarchies and
that the fundamental biological
mechanism for the regulation of
hierarchy is the serotonin system
that's not disputable now you can find
animal
organizational structures that vary from
that from that what would you call it
fundamental pattern
but the existence of variance isn't
proof against the existence of a
fundamental pattern
like i don't i don't know how you can
sit there and be skeptical about this
if you know the literature on
hierarchical structure
you understand that across the entire
animal kingdom animals tend to organize
themselves into
chemistry very hierarchies types of
hierarchies right so there's a you have
and that's why we know they're
hierarchies yeah but that the path like
you say
the pattern as if that you know the the
hierarchy is the pattern right okay and
that's fine so chimps have one very
obvious social structure and bonobos
haven't it's not as different as people
have made it out to be the bonobos are a
lot more violent than the
right and they're not hippie monkeys
right observers of the barnabas have
admitted
okay but nonetheless you say that as if
the deed those little details don't
matter as if there can't be such a thing
as
a hierarchy that is much worse than
another hierarchy that's my problem i'm
not saying that at all there's
clearly hierarchies that are worse than
others right baboons have terrible
hierarchies for example
and i'm saying tyrannical hierarchies
aren't my cup of tea
that isn't the point i was making the
point i was making was that
hierarchies can't be blamed on
capitalism or the west they're built
into our biology
that the neural the neurochemistry is so
old that we share it with
with uh crustaceans so that's a third of
a billion years which is the proof that
hierarchies aren't a recent construct if
proof like that needs to be needed
needs to be provided and that the best
way for
people to adopt a uh a
strategy that will move them up the
hierarchy which is a desirable thing in
most regards
is to face the suffering of the world
forthrightly
that's what that chapter is about and
the people who've been criticizing it
uh read it as if it's a defense of the
western patriarch it's like
there's there's no defense of the
western patriarchy i don't think that's
true i think the way that people
criticize it is the
and i think this happens a lot with
evolutionary psychology is a
uh which is not quite what the lobsters
are but it's where other stuff in the
book is
other things you said for example like
uh women wear rouge because it reminds
men of ripe fruit
right well first time why do you think
women wear rouge i
have absolutely no idea right that's
really not a very good answer well yeah
you said before there were a lot of
things you don't know the answer to but
i'll tell you one thing
you're most criticizing your perspective
on this you're criticizing mine so i'm
presuming
that's an alternative idea why women why
do you think where
women wear makeup i think they're an
enormous nightmare let me
let's go back to why women may reach
because it reminds men of not right
fruit okay
first of all not all right fruit is red
uh why would you not want color vision
to detect ripe fruit
do you you want to eat women no i think
unless men are having sex
that's not really what and where is the
evidence that women who are redder
in the cheeks are more have more
offspring what do you think happens
during the sexual flush but that's the
key point isn't it is that you would
expect actually if
this is a sexual selection that women
who are ready
is the proclivity for it to flush red
and yes
youthful women have more children it's a
primary sign of fertility
i think you wait a second here what do
you think
women wear makeup for come on if you're
going to go after me on this
okay let's let's let's women people say
well women wear makeup to feel better
about themselves that's not a very deep
analysis why makeup
that's my facial makeup i'll tell you
why i wear makeup which is to stop the
comments that i would get if i didn't
wear makeup
and my gender i always say my gender is
low maintenance right i don't feel
particularly like a woman inside i don't
really know what that would mean
but what i try and do is try and look
you know in the same way that you get
black women who talk about the problem
with natural hair is it's seen as
unprofessional right and as a woman if
you don't wear makeup that is seen as a
political choice
that is seen as something that you know
you are so you wear makeup to protect
yourself from
from what from geological men no no but
and tyrannical women as well i would say
i think women
very partially judge each other's
appearance and there are very good
reasons for that
probably because they've learned that
from oppressive men no i don't think so
i don't
why do you think it is then i think that
women are encouraged to be seen as being
in competition with each other
encouraged you don't think that there's
anything about that that's natural eh
well i would be reluctant to get into
that because i
i think you could talk about sex
intersexual competition that's a very
big
deal among the social sciences and
evolutionary science it's not my
particular competence
but yeah i wouldn't my conception of the
patriarchy is not that
men are beastly to women it is that
there is a structure in which women
participate
too that overall privileges and benefits
men in order to control female
reproduction
and i think those are two very different
things you write in 12 rules that you
skipped a grade in school and you were
small for your age do you think that
shaped your personality and your
experiences of life
well i did to some degree made it
difficult for me to participate in
sports
so i didn't really do anything that was
fundamentally athletic till i was in
graduate school
so my parents are guilty about that
because they felt that it wasn't good
for me but i'm not unhappy about it
i got through school faster i wasn't a
fan of school and the faster i got
through it the better
i think it might have encouraged me to
do two other things
which was i probably hung around with
rougher kids that i might have otherwise
as partly as a compensation i suppose
for being
smart and academically able and also
small
so i probably exaggerated my
roughness i suppose and it made me
more verbally more capable of verbally
defending myself
but other than that i don't think it had
much of an effect i think i
pretty much left all of that behind
that's very good
also the other thing i was really
interested in was that you married your
teenage sweetheart
mm-hmm yeah well i met her when i was
eight so we've known each other for 50
years yeah
so this is i think really fascinating so
i i read that and i thought that was
quite moving and then i was reading the
bit about um you know
the animal kingdom and bit free take
away from the lobster section is that
you know what happens if your
top lobster is that you get to
impregnate all the females as
being evolutionary successful as a
lobster right um
your that's proclivity towards polygamy
which is one of the things that pulls on
human society
right and you're now the pretty big
lobster
and yet you are monogamous you're
faithful to your wife you don't you know
you don't want to go around impregnating
every woman that you see
right no no one woman's enough trouble
right
so so i think that's right to me that
was really interesting because that's a
way in which we are very obviously very
different
from animal society and to me i mean
there are plenty of societies where
exactly that happens
right you've been able to overcome that
biological urge right and so in the
sense that maybe there are other
biological edges such as men's
propensity towards violence that might
also be overcome
well it's not self-evident that you want
it to be overcome
i mean you don't know what goes along
with it you know i mean
obviously first of all defining violence
isn't that straightforward
how about use of force in self-defense
does that constitute violence
i think to me that's a separate category
of violence i think but it's not that
easy to distinguish them like if you're
what what you want to do with a child
who's aggressive
is socialize them so that they become
sophisticated in their manifestation of
their aggression you don't want to
inhibit it
you certainly don't want to socialize
little boys to be more like little girls
that's
first of all you don't know how to do it
to begin with but second of all it's
not very it's not an advisable strategy
so well i found that really really
interesting because in the book you say
that actually if you feminize men that
might give them
more you know might have more of an
allure towards you know these very
fascists
that's that's standard psychoanalytic
that's like psychoanalysis 101.
if you repress something it comes back
with a vengeance okay so tell me what
you mean by feminizing in that sense
because to me if you don't mind me
saying so you are a man who is
quite feminine you're in touch with your
feminine side you are very well dressed
you talk a lot about
your diet you've talked about your
emotions yeah you're talking about my
diet right but you you cry in public
you um you enjoy spending time with your
kids you know all of these things that
are
not no sad isn't it but they're not
stereotypically male and i think that's
very admirable pretty strange behavior
for a patriarchal
tyrant well that's why i think that
you're probably in some ways you're not
a patriarchal tyrant although actually
all of our
programming if you want to call it that
in biology is is overcomeable because
you are integratable right but you are a
man who some people would say has a lot
of feminine traits like that and i don't
do you think that means that you are now
being in the allure of authoritarian
fascistic ideologies because you you
know you're baking cakes
oh i noticed the allure and then
what do you do with that
work to live such that there's no
temptation in that
which is also what i recommend to
everyone else right if you see any
temptation in that then you should
straighten yourself up
real quick so and that's what i've done
for decades so of course you have to see
the allure in that if you don't see the
allure in it you're a fool just like
if you don't see the allure in the
radical leftist ideas
i mean if they didn't have if if you
didn't understand the allure
you couldn't understand the ideas
they're dangerously alluring
you know it would be lovely if there was
a strong man who could solve all our
problems
and those who deserved it got exactly
what was coming to them
it's not something that i would
recommend as a wish
so but that doesn't mean you you know
you want to be blind to its attraction
you want to see what the dark parts of
you are attracted to
it helps you keep an eye on where things
can go if they go badly sideways
so i don't think it has anything to do
though with my
with my what would you say more
classically feminine interests
um not as far as i can tell
i mean i have all sorts of classically
masculine interests too
so right and seems to be reasonably well
balanced
right so you talk with them about social
i shouldn't socialize little boys like
little girls but actually
you know i have lots of stereotypes i'm
interested in politics which is
overwhelmingly male dominated
um you have lots of classically feminine
interests why you know what is the
problem here with
people having personalities that are a
mixture that there's no problem with
that at all the problem is when it's
dictated by
fiat well i mean who's who's fant
about the education system so in
in schools you think you know that there
is well i outlined
i can't remember the psychologist's name
at the moment but he was quite
influential in the 1980s who recommended
as a control for male violence that
boys be socialized more like little
girls and i don't think that that's a
particularly
unpopular viewpoint so on the the
the emphasis on competition for example
in in games
the increase in in in the rise of
competitive games where scores aren't
kept that sort of thing
is all a manifestation of that kind of
theory as far as i'm concerned the idea
that there's something intrinsically
wrong with competition
it's a very foolish idea especially if
you want to motivate relatively
aggressive boys
because they're competitive well
competition that's not good someone has
to lose it's like
well you're not going to get very far
looking at the world that way i'm afraid
you know maybe you want to generate a
plethora of games so that everybody has
a shot at winning that's a good idea but
you certainly don't want to devalue the
notion of winning
if you're doing something necessary you
should reward people who are
particularly good at it it's part of the
definition of it being necessary
so and that the contr you don't want to
control aggression any more than you
want to control
sex you want to integrate it and and
if it's integrated that's the
integration of the shadow from the union
perspective and something i talk a lot
about in my lectures it's like
you need to have the capacity for danger
you need to be dangerous
but you need to learn how to not use it
except when it's necessary and that is
not the same as being harmless
harmless that's a terrible virtue it's
like a rabbit
there's nothing virtuous about
harmlessness it just means you're
ineffectual
yeah i think i would agree well i i
think there are some people who through
their harmlessness become
iconic and they become symbols i think
the gandhian the principle of
nonviolence he's not harmless
he just transcended his deep violence
that is completely different thing
okay without his without that capacity
there would have been no way he would
have had the strength of character that
he had
he was an integrated person not a
harmless person okay that's a very very
different thing
did you have different ambitions for
your daughter and for your son
of them were different i i encouraged my
daughter in her desire to be a mother
which is not something i did with my son
did you encourage him in his desire to
be a father
absolutely right so you encourage both
of them to be a parent
right but those are different yeah so i
know and
yeah i mean and in some sense i think
it's it's harder for young women because
of course the the problem of integrating
family with career is a more complex
problem for women to solve
so and i spent a lot of time talking to
her about how she might solve that
i wouldn't say that we came up with
anything that was spectacularly original
or successful but
i at least let her know that whatever
pathway
she chose was fine with me if she
as long as she was being honest with
herself about what it was that she
wanted
but also that you know i'm not a fan of
the idea that the most fundamental
orientation that a person is likely to
have in their life is career
i don't believe that's true for most
people i certainly don't believe it's
true for most women and i think the
evidence
supports that claim quite
straightforwardly so um
however it is the only thing that you
get paid for under capitalism
right man live but that's how can you
say something like that
it's so cliched but it's so painful to
hear that maybe cliche but it
nonetheless is true right women do more
capitalism well for god's sake it is no
it isn't you have to
invest into a child for 18 years before
they have any economic utility
it's a consequence of delayed economic
utility we don't know how to monetize it
it's not a consequence of capitalism
it's a consequence of the fact that
human beings have an 18-year dependency
how do you monetize that even in
principle well we don't know we did used
to send them up chimneys to be fair and
at that point well
true really interesting is at that point
children were seen as being much more
the property of the man i mean as they
become economically useless all the
legal studies show that that's when we
start moving to a model of female
custody right because it was about
caring labor but this is the point i'm
making
a model look i'll tell you there are
plenty of men who are not very happy
about the model of female custody
and that would yes and that would
include the what is it 85
of men who are essentially denied 50 50
custody when they divorce and have young
children so i wouldn't think that one of
our major problems or at least a major
unidimensional problem is the proclivity
of men to foist off the custody of their
children onto women
there's certainly another side of that
argument barry no there is and i do
think that actually a lot of
anger has been generated by the way we
have an in britain anyway we have an in
england and wales we have an adversarial
fault-based divorce system that's
something that's changing but what it
does is encourage people to come in on
day one and say
if you want to get divorced you're going
to have to make out a case that the
other person has been a boss
it doesn't matter because if you move to
a non-fault-based divorce system then
all that happens is the fault shifts to
who should get custody
so it doesn't remove the acrimony by any
stretch of the imagination it just
shifts it to custody of the children
that's what's happened in canada right
and in britain we actually talk about
access rather than custody because
the idea is not that you own the
children it's that you actually want to
be able to see the children and spend
time with them and i think that's really
important
but fault-based divorce is is something
that increases the chances of couples
having a bad divorce right that's the
problem is it it sets people against
each other from the start they have to
go into court and contest that the other
person has done something wrong
which is not a great base in which to
start then an argument about you
should be encouraged to divorce even if
no one's done anything wrong no i
think that having to prove that in a
court of law is not something that is
going to lead you to a better
arbitration about settling money and
settling
you know access to children i think
that's the point you have a ridiculous
situation where couples who say well
actually we've just grown apart
nonetheless unless they want to wait
five years or two years for separation
they have to go in and plead
unreasonable behavior to get a divorce
and start splitting up their assets
that's the joy of no fault divorce is
that you don't have to make those
contest cases you can simply say our
marriage is no longer working
and part ways without going into all of
that acrimony that seems quite sensible
to me
it also seems quite naive to me i've
seen very few non-acrimonious divorces
they're very hard on kids so i think i
don't think anything that makes them
easier is a very good idea
it might be good in the short term but
it's not good in the long term
unless unless you don't think that
marriage is a useful institution and if
you think that it's part of the
patriarchal tyranny then you might think
that as well
so but it's a very useful institution
mostly for kids
so i agree that i'm married modern
marriage has a lot to recommend it i do
also think it is a patriarchal
institution it is literally why you
think that well
because you think virtually everything
that occurs in our society is a
patriarchal institution
it's easy to think that because then you
only have to think one thing you could
give a one thing answer for everything
you could let
me part of the patriarchal institution i
don't think you're obeying the rule that
says maybe treat people as if they have
something worth hearing so
i'm not making a case for the
patriarchal tyranny i don't think you
are either i think that you're making a
case that
that's like a a universally cliched case
for the patriarchal tyranny i don't
i don't see their too at all why do
women change their names on marriage
traditionally
i don't know exactly why do you think
they do because it was to symbolize the
transfer of their ownership from one
family to another family that's why in
the handmaid's tale you have off
warrants oh god
margaret atwood well she was just about
devoured by the feminists last year so
that was something interesting to
observe
i think she made a very good but she
wasn't divided by all feminists i'm a
feminist i thought what she said about
due process in cases like that is
perfectly reasonable well many people
didn't
no but then you know guess what this is
the on the internet you can find someone
who disagrees with pretty much
anything but so why do you think women
change their names when they get married
traditionally
if it's not about transfer of property
ownership traditionally
i don't know if i have an opinion about
that the the specific reasons for that
i'd have to look into it for a fair
amount of time before i decided it but i
certainly wouldn't
boil it down to a unidimensional
argument about the ownership of women by
men
so okay i just you know the part of the
problem too
is with this sort of discussion is that
it's
and this is why i consider it a
manifestation of ideological possession
it's predictable well that's what
you know knowing your stance on but
having a coherent ideology does mean
that it is predictable because you don't
need an ideology it is one logical thing
that flows from another and all those
pieces tessellate together so what i
find very interesting about your
thinking i find it quite slightly
baffling is that i don't really see how
all the pieces fit together
you know you say that you're not you
know you believe in god but there's a
lot of
yeah emphasis about i actually say i act
as if god exists right
but which is actually my definition of
belief okay
so but that's it but that then doesn't
to me tessellate very obviously with
your
insistence that we know actually it's
just about pure science and there's not
you know that because what what
insistence that it's just about pure
science
i wrote maps of meaning there's no
insistence in that that it's just about
pure
science okay but you make a picture
different you make appeals to science
all the time you say well this is
what the literature says and the trouble
with god is ultimately you can't say
this is what the literature says there
is no literature which is why i don't
don't say anything about the scientific
status of god apart from
what can be experienced maybe under
certain conditions of what would you
call
chemical induced mysticism which seems
to be
something that you can say something
scientifically about
but i see that there's two different
realms right there's a realm of values
in the realm of facts and in the realm
of facts science reigns supreme
but it doesn't in the realm of values
you have to look elsewhere that was what
the humanities were for
before they got what would you say
hijacked by ideologues
and you know the the idea that that that
some
that something should be consistent you
were
talking about the necessity for
consistency and ideology it's like
i'm not hearing what you think i'm
hearing what
how you're able to represent the
ideology you were taught
and it's not that interesting because i
don't know anything about you
i could replace you with someone else
who thinks the same way
and that means you're not here that's
what it means
it's not pleasant so
you're not you're not you're not drawing
you're not integrating
the specifics of your personal
experience with what you've been taught
to synthesize something that's
genuine and surprising and engaging in a
narrative sense as a consequence
and that's the pathology of ideological
possession it's not good
and it's not good that i i know where
you stand on things once i know a few
things
it's like why have a conversation i
already know where you stand on things i
bet you don't know where i stand on all
things
i i would hope that that that was true
okay
uh let's talk about let's talk about
transgender issues that's one what do
you think i think about transgender
issues
i suspect that you think that gender
expression gender identity
are fundamentally social constructs but
i could be wrong
no i believe that there are definitely
some biological differences between the
sexes we've observed them
i do believe that gender is a hugely
powerful social structure that we've
built on top of that that it is
largely but not entirely socially
constructed i think when you look back
through the history you know
biological differences have consistently
shrunk
and like we were talking in the age they
haven't in scandinavia they've magnified
okay but we were talking about that's
actually an important exception because
scandinavia has gone farther than any
other
area the scandinavian countries in
establishing egalitarian social policy
and the differences in interest and
career choice and personality between
men and women have grown
as a consequence not shrunk which is
exactly the opposite of what the social
construction is predicting but also to
suggest that they're
malleable actually rather than fixed
well of course they're malleable no one
would ever suggest otherwise right so
that's what i mean so i think they're
not malleable in the direction that the
social constructionist presumed
as you flatten out the sociological
landscape you maximize the biological
differences
no one saw that coming and you might
think well it's a handful of right-wing
scientists who are pushing that it's
like no it's not it's mainstream
psychology and there aren't any radical
right-wingers in mainstream psychology
and everyone who discovered that was
absolutely shocked by it and these
papers have been cited by thousands of
people
and they have tens of thousands of
subjects and they've been done on
virtually national level samples
cross-culturally
but i also think the behavior in
scandinavia has changed for example a
lot more men take
paternity leave now that there is a
portion that is reserved purely for men
that doesn't seem to make them wildly
unhappy so i think
there are definitely behavioral things
that are susceptible to nudges by
society by
government and by the state and that do
change the way that people behave
so we can possibly meet in the middle of
now that people can
be educated and that we can develop as a
consequence of learning that's that's
certainly not a disputable
proposition and i also believe that
there is no evidence for
gender identity in the way that it is
used and
by uh you know as an idea of a soul i
think that that's the way that it's
often used to me
by who by by transgender activists yes
well i think about having a female soul
and that to me is seems
strange i don't see how you something
like biological determinism right
which is very it's one of the things
that's so
perversely amusing about these sorts of
arguments is that well but i
i attribute it to the lack of demand for
logical consistency as a consequence of
post-modern thinking
you can believe one thing when it's
convenient in one situation and another
thing when it's convenient for another
so we're in the perverse position where
if you're a man born in a woman's body
that's biologically determined but if
you're a woman born in a woman's body
that's socially constructed
it's like okay good luck with that
theory right i don't believe you can be
a man born in a woman's body a woman
born in a man's body what i believe is
there are some people who
feel alienation towards their bodies and
they want to remove
well everybody feels that right but they
feel it to such an extent that the best
clinically the best treatment for them
is to transition and live as if they
were the ones yeah well i don't think
that there's any evidence that that's
clinically the best treatment
we certainly don't know enough to make
that presupposition and i think we're
playing with fire assuming that that's
the case
the the long-term outcome studies
certainly don't don't
uh demonstrate that so it's not
so so i would make a very big
distinction there between adults and
between children
i think that would be a good distinction
to make right but i think we are very
quick to diagnose and treat children in
a way that i find
and not waiting for the research and
that i find concerning yeah
so well the lawsuits will put it into
that in about 15 years
so there's there's there's one place
that we've found from which that is
something that gets me a lot of hate
right
i'm sure it does a turf and a bigot for
that so right
i don't think that's something that you
would have been able to predict that i
think because that is not now the
orthodox feminist position
i agree completely isn't that good
congratulations we've all learned
something
um i just wanted to talk quickly about
uh
about me too movement
uh tell me your reaction to what's
unfolded over the last year
i won't put words in your mouth you tell
me
well there's certainly no shortage of
evidence
for reprehensible sexual behavior on the
part of
people who can use power to get away
with it
so that's not so good
the metoo movement i suspect it probably
did some good things and some terrible
things
so i would say that there is a dangerous
proclivity to abandon the concept of
the presumption of innocence so in
university campuses for example we're
moving towards a preponderance of
evidence model
i'm not very happy with that model i
think that's a very big mistake the
presumption of innocence is nothing
short of a miracle and we abandon it at
our extreme peril
so i'm not happy with that i think the
believe the victim idea is
something that only a fool could could
could conjure up
because it opens the door to to
unbelievable
opportunity for manipulation um
i think i would disagree with you and
slightly on that because i think what
that means is what
what people are arguing for is don't
instantly dismiss or disbelieve the
victim right which is right
that's partly what they're very
different there's plenty of people who
are arguing for
the fundamental attitude to be believe
the victim
so some people are are arguing to not
automatically disbelieve the victim
which is a perfectly reasonable thing to
argue for but that isn't where it ends
so okay climate change uh i saw you
posting a link
to a study suggesting that you know a
lot of the
the weather it's talked about has been
over hyped what do you what are your
what are your beliefs about
well i spent a lot of time i don't
really have beliefs about climate change
i wouldn't say
i mean i think the climate is probably
warming but it's been warming since the
last ice age so i don't think it's
dramatically accelerated in the la
even in the last yeah maybe possibly
it's not so obvious i spent quite a bit
of time going through the relevant
literature i
i read about 200 books on ecological
what would you call it on ecology and
economy when i worked for the un for
about a two year period and it's not so
obvious
what's happening just like with any
complex system
the problem i have fundamentally isn't
really the
climate change issue it's that i find it
very difficult
to distinguish valid environmental
claims
from environmental claims that are made
as a what would you call it secondary
anti-capitalist front essentially
so it's so politicized that it's very
difficult to parse out the data from the
politicization
so i saw there was a line in 12 rules
which says people stricken with poverty
don't care about
carbon dioxide yeah there's that's
definitely the case
and i think that's not an unreasonable
point to make because you think about
maslow's hierarchy of needs right people
if you can't eat then actually you can't
really worry about what's happening in
50 years to the planet
however i don't think that's a reason
not to tackle climate change because
those same people people in the global
science it's partly a reason
is it though because people in the
globalization generated plants stop
people from starving
so yes it's partly a reason and it's
certainly the case that
making energy more expensive obviously
makes things more difficult for
poor people so yes it's definitely an
issue and i would say you know it's kind
of a conundrum for those on the left
it's like what's it going to be
clean air or hungry people think well we
don't have to choose it's like
okay oh renewable energy or good luck
with that or nuclear power i'd be fine
with more nuclear power yeah well
it doesn't look like we're moving in
that direction very fast but that is
that is
that is a solution while it worked for
the french
i was fascinated david attenborough is
something kind of close to a national
religion in britain so there's a bit
where you say
population control advocates like him
you confess eric harris one of the
columbine killers
why then is it virtuous to propose that
the planet might be better off if there
are fewer people on it
and i found that completely boggling
that you have
elided their population control through
people not
being born and the mass slaughter of
people who are already alive
the motivation that i question right
tell me more about that
well what kind of statement is the
planet would be better off with fewer
people on it
first of all there's an easy solution to
that you could leave
unfortunately much the best efforts of
elon musk that is not yet
an option permanently
that's what i meant yes if you're very
concerned about your carbon footprint
there's a very fast solution to that
so and i think it's disingenuous to
what's the other people or maybe it's
the people who haven't been born yet
it's like i don't i'm there's a this is
also the problem i have with much of the
environmentalist movement is there's a
powerful stream of anti-human
sentiment that motivates it and
masquerading under the guise of
virtue on a planetary scale it's like
could be
i mean it's not like we're not fouling
our own nest
you know that's why that's why i'm i'm
fascinated by where you come from is
because the book you know is so much
about things being in
balance and harmony right and order and
chaos outweigh each other well
what overpopulation has done is got to
the center it says we have
overpopulation
well i think that it's very difficult to
see under the current model of fossil
fuel based capitalism
sorry to use that word i know it upsets
you but that is what you until we've
until we've run it when we run out of
fossil fuels yeah that's not going to
happen
well it will happen yeah because there
are people have been saying that's going
to happen for 50 years and
now that now the united states is a net
exporter of fossil fuel
right and so no one saw that coming did
they but it happened
and you're right that might be the case
but at the moment i would say that you
know china is putting up new coal
power stations you know by the bucket
load it is entirely possible that the
stuff that the
developed nations did that now
developing nations did you know and now
we're doing
something sometimes they're concerned
about clean air when they get richer
that's what the data indicate once you
get gdp
up to about five thousand dollars per
year people start to become concerned
with environmental issues
so if we make that might happen fast
enough i don't think so
it'll happen too late for some things it
looks like we're going to top out at
about 9 billion i think we can handle
that
i think probably people one of the
problems that will be set us in 100
years
assuming there are even creatures like
us around in 100 years
is that there'll be too few people not
too many you know the projections top
out at about 9 billion it's only 2
billion more than we have now
there's every reason to assume that we
can cope with that especially given the
rapid decreases in poverty around the
world at the moment
there's a bit of a bottleneck there'll
probably be some more extinction
what we're doing to the oceans by
overfishing doesn't seem very smart
but we've only been aware of our role as
planetary stewards since
1960 i would say and we're not doing too
bad for people who just woke up to the
fact that we actually have that we're
actually a planetary force
and i don't think that we're over
populated i think all the arguments that
all the all the people who made those
arguments in the 1960s like paul ehrlich
i think he wrote the population bomb
predicted mass starvation by the year
2000
he was absolutely and completely wrong
now we've been very lucky with things
like golden rice for example genetic
engineering of crops i think
it's not luck well no it is it is
i agree there you know human ingenuity
is a huge part of that definitely right
well in
more people you know more ingenuity you
know and bjorn lomberg
who i really admire the skeptical
environmentalist who's actually gone a
very long ways to trying to figure out
what we could do at a planetary level
that would actually be
useful and productive his research has
indicated the best
the best possible investment isn't
carbon tax it isn't
cessation of utilization of carbon-based
fuel it's probably investment in early
infant
care around the world especially in
developing countries seems right to me
he's done the analysis very carefully
one more area that you've talked about
that's caused controversy is
gay parenting you said the the devil is
in the detail and you want to see more
studies on that what do you think might
be the adverse effects of having
same-sex parents
well i don't think we know um
what modeling is optimal for children
that's really the issue i mean i suspect
that two parents are better than one
suspect right i don't know
one parent is definitely worse than two
we know that
um but we don't know what exposure
to role models say is necessary for the
continuity of maternal behavior
or for the adoption of functional gender
roles we don't know any of that
and so that's the variable obviously
you know no one knows what the
consequence of being raised with
two people of the same sexes maybe none
right so there doesn't seem to be any
evidence so far
that's that's all the literature review
suggests that absolutely there was a
there were a couple that were that
showed problems but they were in in
couple coupledoms that had already
broken down right so so there is no as
no evidence maybe there will be some
found but at the moment there is no
evidence
that there is any problem with having
gay parents i never said there was i
somebody asked me i believe it was a
question like if there was a problem
what would it be
it's something like that no i mean you
can make a very strong
conservative case for gay marriage i
think i mean not that i would
necessarily be motivated to make a
conservative argument
david cameron our former prime minister
said i'm support gay marriage because
i'm a conservative yes right
right so you know it's it's obviously
homosexuality is
it's been around forever
also what's the appropriate social
response to that well
conceivably bringing
as many people as possible into
something approximating the same game
i think you could make a reasonable case
for that what's the consequence of that
for
children in those families i don't know
i mean what i would say is while the
obvious risk is that there's no one of
the opposite sex around
i mean it doesn't take up what would you
it doesn't take
the perception of genius to come up with
the observation that that might be
a problem no maybe it's not and my
suspicions are there's probably
far more relevant problems with regards
to
what happens to children that isn't good
than that
so so this is a way in which you know
that is now a
conservative position to hold i think
it's uh 20 years ago that would have
been
anathema to mainstream control well
people were concerned with the
deterioration of marriage and believe
that any additional transformations
would further weaken it and i think that
that's
not an unreasonable position given how
weak it's become
and i don't think that that's been good
for people overall
okay let's talk about free speech to
finish on you write in your book about
nietzsche who became the nazi's favorite
intellectual and you also talk about a
professor only through his
sister's mistranslations of his work
right but
you talk a little bit as well about
another professor whose ideas you
thought led in never to be to kind of
maoism and you said i don't know how he
can't be more
worried about where his ideas lead do
you worry
about where you you know where your work
might be taken and used by other people
i saw you posing with them i worry about
that all the time
with a pepe flag i can't believe you
brought that up right but i just think
it's the e
seriously i can't believe you brought
that up you should go online yeah
i do there's a believe me i do there's a
video
uh called i think it's called is jordan
peterson a darling of the alt-right have
you have you
re have you watched the video of the
person who put up that peppy flag with
me
he's online but i don't watch it i have
seen you wouldn't i would say
and why are you concerned about pepe
anyways jesus he disappeared like three
years ago it is and most of that was
trolling by young guys who were trying
to drag the media into idiot accusations
like the idea that this was a white
supremacist
gesture which i was asked about on cbc
it's like
no it wasn't it was fortran trolls
playing
the media for fools which worked and
much of the peppy thing was that as well
okay but the problem with people
ironically pretending to be nazis on the
internet they weren't pretending to be
nonsense but no this is a separate
phenomenon and a 4chan definitely do
ironically pretend to be all the worst
things they can possibly be
is that some people take that very
seriously there was a case in america
recently of a guy who stabbed his father
because he had thought that his father
was a democrat he'd got bet he was
writing stuff for
a conservative website he'd got very
into the pizzagate conspiracy theory
he's probably paranoid
right so there are people who take this
up very very seriously and they latch on
to it
what's your point i'm i'm saying that
you know how much responsibility do you
feel you have particularly guys the
alt-right as you say
some of them have enjoyed your work and
so i'm not one of i'm not one of you
guys i'm not with you guys they haven't
enjoyed my work
i've definitely read bits on the
internet read more
okay find some evidence i'm
extraordinarily
sick and tired of this particular
accusation
line of questioning i'm no fan of the
identitarian right
the ethno-nationalists the alt-right
first of all what do you mean by
alt-right exactly
do you mean ethno-nationalists do you
meet white supremacists no i mean people
who are on the right but have got their
power base outside the traditional media
they see themselves as an alternative so
i see them
it's a pretty loose definition rush
limbaugh
kind of um talk radio right people who
see themselves in opposition to
rush limbo is not the alt-right he's
been around for 30 years right so he's
the progenitor of what i see now
breitbart and things like that are the
new media version of that very old media
well let's define what constitutes
alt-right first for me they're
ethno-nationalists they tend to be white
supremacists and
generally when people tire me with an
alt-right epithet the reason they're
doing that is to associate me with those
people
they don't like me and the reason for
that is that as me i've made it very
clear
not only in my videos but on twitter
that i don't like them
i don't like their anti-semitism i don't
like their use of identity politics
i don't agree with their aims i think
that their
notion is something like well if
everybody's going to play identity
politics
we're going to play it too and we're
going to win and i can certainly
understand that motivation but i think
it's a bad game
all around and i think the only reason
that i was ever associated in
any sense whatsoever with anything to do
with the alt-right was because it was
extremely convenient of the radical
leftists who i fundamentally detest
to paint me as a representative of that
viewpoint right
other than that zero now okay but that's
not what i did you say so i no point did
i say you were well you brought up the
whole picture
but i did bring that but there was a
reason i did that which is that
nietzsche himself said i'm an
anti-anti-semite right and yet his
ideology and his philosophy ended up
being used by the nazis so my question
to you is
how much responsibility do you feel
about
what i feel it's not how much
responsibility i feel
it's how much responsibility i take
right right
and i take as much responsibility as i
possibly can right which is why i'm
doing what i'm doing
when i'm going around the world i'm
talking in different cities i'm talking
to people as much as i can
i'm putting out content that i think is
useful for people online
and i'm clarifying what i think i have
300
videos on youtube virtually for all
intents and purposes
every single word i've said to students
in a professional capacity since 1992
and despite the fact that i have
innumerable highly motivated enemies
they haven't been able to find one thing
i've said
in 30 years that uh what would you say
justifies any of those accusations or
any other accusations for that matter
so it's uh it's
it's quite the phenomena i mean i
understand it to some degree you know
sorry about the pepe flags you can you
can help me explain
why why did you pose with it what were
your reasons for doing it
did people just come up and bring it to
you and and yeah i was like posing with
i i probably been photographed with
i don't know 5 000 people in the last
two years and you know
it's one after the other often in groups
of 150
or 200 people and it just it's like
15 seconds right and they brought this
flag one of them had spoken at the event
they were doing it ironically um
they unfurled the flag and
we took a picture and that was that
would you post ironically with a hammer
and sickle flag
i i don't know under the circumstances
how what i would have done i have
all sorts of soviet art in my house
right because i think anybody could get
caught out and social embarrassment is a
huge factor and you don't want to kind
of tell people you've been very nice to
you that actually you don't want to do
the thing
i just wonder if that's something that
you regret now that you wouldn't do
again if you
if you had the opportunity
well i don't think it did me any good
ah i don't think i'll betray my former
self we'll just leave it where it is
i made the decision that i made under
the circumstances and took what
was there into consideration i think
that
i think that the pepe formulators did a
wonderful job
of trolling the standard media i don't
think that they were
what everyone presumed
them to be i think they did a wonderful
job of trolling you as well in a sense
right recruiting you and your image and
your
appeal to people to to their kind of
cause
which is ironic i don't really think so
it is not actually
you know underneath it all i don't find
it very ironic actually
what don't you find ironic that a lot of
the kind of 4chan culture which is
saying i'm just going to say the worst
possible thing that i can say just to
prove that i can say it because free
speech is still alive
i think that in itself is quite
poisonous to the discourse i think
i try and conduct myself online in a
relatively civilized manner i do not
always succeed
but i do not think just going into a
room and screaming
epithets is something that i need to do
on a daily basis to prove that free
speech isn't dead right
i think we could probably agree that
that's a reasonable a reasonable
a rare note of consensus i i but i have
to come back to the free speech idea
because
i think that whole idea of the
intellectual dark web and this came up a
couple of times
at your event on thursday it's
predicated on the idea that you have
been
marginalized for your opinions or a
press for your opinion predicated on my
claim of that
right it's predicated on well i don't
know i'm not claiming i've been
marginalized i would never use that word
first of all that's for sure
so but the idea of a dog i don't feel
oppressed good i'm pleased to hear it
but i do think that the way that you you
got the cheers from that that crowd was
very much about there was an idea of
taboo breaking right
that oh this is a microaggression but
i'm going to say it anyway that you know
hard work is the way to succeed
and i thought that was fascinating
because to me you don't look like
somebody who has
particularly suffered an outrageous
amount for your opinions people have
certainly disagreed they've been
rude they've you know they've in some
cases the only reason i haven't suffered
an outrageous amount for my opinions is
because i've handled the consequence of
their utterance exceptionally well
my job was at risk my career was at risk
my family's stability was at risk
so i wouldn't push that one too far in
what way was your job at risk
jesus last year 200 of my fellow
faculty members signed a petition to get
me fired that was only one of a dozen
things that happened the university
wrote me two letters two cease and
desist letters from their hr departments
with their legal staff
three of those and you're done they just
fired rick meda in canada
at acadia university for talking about
many of the same things that i've talked
about
so the fact that i've come through this
relatively unscathed has very little to
do with the vitriol of the attacks
there is plenty of motivation to take me
out it just didn't work
right and i think the fact that it
didn't work to me makes me ultimately
optimistic about where we are because
i've why because i've worked i went on i
did a panel a while ago with zaghanara a
burmese comedian who was imprisoned for
making a joke right and we are not yet
at that stage i think
undoubtedly we're not we're damn close
really um how about the guy with the pug
in the uk count dankula that's the one
right but he did actually i mean that
was a joke
i might not have liked it i didn't say
it was a good joke
i didn't say it was an appropriate joke
i didn't say any of that
i didn't say it was a well thought
through joke
but it was a joke yeah i don't i just
fundamentally not don't believe that it
was a joke i believe that it was
camouflaged as a joke and that's what it
kind of comes across right
well that's exactly what you would
believe if you were inclined to
persecute comedians
no i'm not inclined to pesky well you're
inclined to persecute him
i don't think he's a comedian and i
don't think i i i
i would have to look at the
circumstances of that case but i i think
he didn't like his
girlfriend's pug and thought he would
teach it to do something reprehensible
as a joke
right but i see you getting involved say
tweeting douglas murray's article like
tommy robinson and i think you see that
as a free speech issue and that's not
how i see tommy robinson's case at all i
see that as contempt of court someone
who endangered a grooming trial
how do you see that case i see it as
very fortunate that tommy robinson
didn't die in prison
i think i would say that about a lot of
people in prison i think it's very hard
to be
in prison if you are a sex offender for
example i think our
british prisons are less inhumane than
american prisons but they are still
brutal places to be
however i do think that was an
appropriate punishment for somebody
who tried to collapse a grooming trial
well but are you and i guess are you
sorry are you a prison abolitionist
no oh right okay so you do believe that
some people there are offenses for which
people need to go to prison
why would you ask me a question like
that it looks like someone who
isn't interested in meeting out
appropriate punishment no but i just
thought maybe i was made an assumption
about you
and i didn't want to make an assumption
about you um i'm just going to end with
a quick fire around
so i know that uh this isn't well this
is youtube so we have been able to talk
for a really long time but i just want
quick answers from you
who is your favorite author dostoevsky
who's your favorite female author
margaret lawrence i think i don't know
her she's a canadian author
kind of an antidote to margaret atwood
in my estimation okay
when did you last cry oh god who knows
last week probably
who is your smartest opponent
hmm sam harris is pretty smart
because you've had debates about atheism
with him and about rationality
yeah i don't really regard him exactly
as an opponent you know i mean
we disagree on things i don't really
tend to think of people as opponents
generally i mean but harris is you know
harris is smart he's good at making his
case
and so that's been that's been
interesting
what big question don't you know the
answer to
what big question don't i know the
answer to well god that's a tough one
there's so many of them
well personally it's what i should do in
two years
when did you last change your mind about
something important
i'm changing my mind about things all
the time every time i do a lecture i
change my mind about something but
something important something big
oh well i i can tell you i mean um
one thing i've learned in the last two
years
is that i think i
overestimated there's an obesity
epidemic in north america
perhaps throughout the western world
i think i overestimated the degree to
which that was a consequence of a
sedentary lifestyle
and overestimated the degree to which a
lack of discipline was contributing to
it i think
i think much more now that it's an
illness
those are two different things aren't
they discipline is self-control
and illness is something out of your
country well let's say
you're overweight you should exercise
it's like well
actually the evidence that exercise will
thin you down isn't that great
and maybe the reason that you're not
exercising is because you're ill
not that you're ill because you're not
exercising
so i've i have a lot more
sympathy for the hypothesis that
the obesity epidemic is actually a
consequence of a
of a of an illness of a broad scale
illness isn't exactly right
it's a dietary problem fundamentally and
there are deep causes for that
are you still eating your all beef diet
unfortunately
yes really just just beef
not can you have like ketchup on it
nothing
right yes i wouldn't it isn't something
i would lightly recommend
it's a little hard on your social life
it makes traveling quite difficult and
it's dull as hell
but but but what's it what has it done
for you
well i lost 50 pounds in seven months
i stopped snoring i had some autoimmune
conditions that seemed to have gone away
i'm not taking antidepressants my mood
isn't perfectly regulated but
i'm under a fair bit of stress so that
might have something to do with it
i sleep much less um i can work more
um imagine your arteries might not be
i don't i don't shape i don't think
there's any evidence that
that i don't think we have any idea what
causes arteriosclerosis i think all of
the dietary knowledge we have is
is rubbish and partly because it's
unbelievably difficult to do proper
dietary studies
you can't do controlled studies say it's
all correlational
and there's so many variables i think
the correlational studies are useless
so um also
the this all meat diet this all beef
diet has
apparently cured my daughter so who had
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis well
that was the original diagnosis then it
was idiopathic which means we don't
know what health is causing it yeah but
she's completely symptom free
so that sort of thing makes you sit up
and take notice
because it doesn't make any sense
when was the last time you lied because
the book says
no lying do you still lie
everybody lies as dr house himself told
us
what is most important i'm pretty damn
careful about it what is most important
to you in life
not being stupid how would you like
making foolish mistakes not being in
cautious
yeah that's tough on yourself life's
tough man
right how would your life have been
different if you've been born female
multiple orgasms it's not a bad one
what's your biggest regret
that i didn't take advantage of the
opportunity to learn to play the organ
when i was seven
if that's your biggest regret this is
going to be a great deathbed because
that's
yeah well you know i would have liked it
would have been better for me if i would
have been better musician
and finally how would you like to be
remembered
as someone honest
dr jordan peterson thank you very much

you say you are morally obligated to do
remarkable things
why well I think partly because life is
so difficult and challenging that unless
you give it everything you have the
chances are very high that it will
embitter you and then you'll be a force
for darkness and not good and
so you know the the fact that life is
short and can be brutal can terrify you
into
hiding and avoiding but it it can also
you can flip that on its head and
understand that since you're all in
anyways you might as well take take the
risks that are
adventurous and that's a very good thing
to
understand and what is also useful to
understand in that is that there isn't
anything more adventurous than the
truth this is something that took me a
long time to figure out well you can
craft your words to get what you want
you know and people do that all the time
they craft their words so they can avoid
taking responsibility for things they
should take responsibility for they can
craft the words to gain an advantage
that they really don't deserve that's
what you do when you
manipulate and the problem with that you
might say well why not do that if I can
get what I want and the answer that is
you aren't necessarily the best judge of
what you need and it's easy to be
diluted in what you want and that's the
sort of delusions that people chase if
they chase
power if you decide instead that you're
going to just say what you believe to be
true you have to let go of the
consequences and you might think well I
don't want to let go of the consequences
because I want to control what's going
on but what you miss then is Adventure
because if you don't control what's
going on you don't know what the hell's
going to happen and maybe that's
exciting and actually there's no doubt
about it and then you have the
additional Advantage if you're
attempting to say what you believe to be
true and attempting to act in the manner
that you think is most appropriate
that's genuinely you and you have the
force of reality behind you and
obviously that's what you have if you're
trying to say live in the truth is you
have the force of reality behind you
that seems like a good deal then you
have the reality and the adventure so
why is that a moral obligation well if
you hide and you don't let what's inside
of you out and you don't bring into the
world what you could bring and you
become cynical and bitter you will start
doing very dark things so you'll start
in not only will you not add to the
world what you could add but you'll
start being jealous of people who are
competent and doing well and work to
destroy them
so that's the pathway to hell
really so one of the trends that I've
been railing against most recently has
been cynicism is this pervasive belief
that everything is terrible and it can't
get better and the people who believe
that it can improve a dumb and
delusional and the problem
and I I don't know where it comes from I
don't I don't it's the beginning of
wisdom cynicism this is part of the
reason why it's hard to combat
you know because people start out naive
and naive people are optimistic but not
really they're just naive and naive
people have no idea that there's say
malevolence in the world they have no
idea that there's malevolence in their
own heart they're sheltered and
dependent and when that breaks it often
breaks into cynicism and so cynicism is
actually an improvement the veils have
fallen from your eyes exactly exactly
the problem with cynicism is that
especially if it's allied with a kind of
arrogance is that you can end there and
that's a big mistake so then the
question becomes what once you once
you've been bitten hard and you're no
longer naive well that is very hard on
your optimism let's say so then the
question is how do you restore that
without reverting to the naivity which
you can't do anyways without blinding
yourself once you've been bitten and the
answer to that is you substitute courage
for naivity and you and you regain your
optimism as a moral imperative right so
one of the things you might ask yourself
is well if the future is likely to be
catastrophic in a variety of different
ways which is definitely the case both
socially and personally then what
attitude should you bring to bear on
that and the answer might be well if you
were courageous and faithful and I can
explain what that means then you would
conduct yourself in in a manner that met
the future headon with the presumption
that you can manage it and this is the
presumption we should bring to bear
politically now
these the people who are using fear to
Garner
power point to the various apocalypses
that might befall us and it's difficult
to counter them because the future is
always an apocalyptic Horizon like
everything can fall apart and and has
before and might well again and will in
fact in your life as you age and die and
so it's very easy to conjure up an
apocalypse then the question becomes the
question becomes not is that apocalypse
potentially real because the answer to
that is yes but what attitude should you
have towards that naive that's not good
cynical that's that's better but it's
still not good it's another form of hell
and it also tends to make the potential
apocalypses more likely well so what do
you have when you move Beyond cynicism
and what you have when you move Beyond
cynicism is wisdom and that's not naive
it's Courageous one of the things that
religious people have done relatively
badly especially in recent years is
theyve failed to delineate the
relationship between faith and courage
you know people like Dawkins and the new
atheists they point to Faith and they
describe it as something like belief in
foolish
superstitions but that isn't really what
faith in the deepest sense means it
means that you are willing to act out
the proposition that you can ride the
wave no matter how big it becomes and
that we can all do that together
especially if we do that in Good Will
and I think that's that's a much more
it's a much more appropriate way to
confront the future and it's also the
proper medication for cynicism now the
other thing the cynics see the other
thing about cynicism that's interesting
too is that cynics aren't cynical enough
about their own cynicism right because
you can get doubtful enough to start
doub
the validity of your own cynicism it's
like what makes you so smart what makes
you the judge of being and the Coline
kids were like that you know they
decided that existence itself was
unsustainable given its cruelty and that
the proper response was to put up a
giant middle finger to man men and God
right
well here's a way of being cynical about
cynicism how does your cynicism let you
off the hook right how does your
cynicism justify your desire to avoid
necessary responsibility and to pursue
your own short-term hedonic gains it's
like why aren't you cynical about your
own doubt and that's that's another
place where wisdom begins it's like that
so that's two
right cynicism beats naivity but it's
not the ultimate destination and you
should be cynical enough to question the
moral validity of your own of your own
resentment and your own what would you
say your own turning away from the world
the way that I see it given that we
don't know the future given that much of
our motivations are invisible to
us we're not a Crystal Pond that we can
see
into you have to have some form of
delusion about what's going to happen in
the future you're trying your best to
see the way that it's going to be but
given that the glass could be half empty
or half full why not have a delusion
that's going to be useful to you one of
Hope even in the face and the
understanding that things might be
difficult and that there's going to be
obstacles yeah there was a there was a
line of social psychology that pursued
that argument for quite a while that
made the argument that people had to
have positive Illusions about the future
and that that was the fundamental way
that people staved off Despair and
bolstered their self-esteem but I don't
think I don't
think we need to separate out the
distinction between fantasy and
delusion you do have a fantasy about the
future you have to because like you said
it's not structured so you have to you
have to provisionally map the future
that's what a plan is what a strategy is
right but that doesn't make it a
delusion like it becomes a delusion when
the map Bears no relationship to the
underlying territory so if you have a
strategy for the future you know maybe
let's say that your strategy for the
future just for the sake of argument is
that you have 5 million YouTube
subscribers in 3 years well well you
have no
evidence of the strict sort that that's
how it's going to be because Anything
could happen between now and 3 years
from now let's say
but
you there's no reason to call that a
delusion it's a it's one it's one
hypothetically possible path of
potential and then you can make the
sacrifices necessary to bring that about
so even though it's a fantasy because it
something that isn't there it's not a
delusion it's a delusion when you're
ignoring elements of your own experience
that would inform your fantasy more
effectively you're ignoring them so that
you can live in a positive
representation of the future without
having to pay the appropriate price for
it one of my favorite ideas I learned
over the last couple of years is the
inner Citadel from isai bin do you know
this MH so isai bin says when the
natural Road toward human fulfillment is
blocked human beings Retreat into
themselves become involved in themselves
and try to create inwardly that world
which some evil Fate has denied them
externally that's a delusion often if
you cannot obtain from the world that
which you really desire you must teach
yourself not to want it if you cannot
get what you want you must teach
yourself to want what you can get this
is a very frequent form of spiritual
retreat in depth into a kind of inner
Citadel in which you lock yourself up
against all of the fearful ills of the
world mutual friend Henderson explained
it in a simpler way if your leg is
wounded you can try to treat the leg MH
and if you can't then you cut the leg
off and announce that the desire for
legs is misguided and must be subdued
and I think that we see this everywhere
well okay so you so imagine that you lay
out a plan and it meets with an
impediment and it knocks the slots out
from underneath the plan okay now you
Retreat okay now you have an option when
you're retreating and one option is to
construct a world in fantasy where
you're taking revenge on those who
wronged you and getting what you want
that's that's a pathway to Madness so
often people who develop serious
delusions do develop um what would you
call them their their compensatory
fantasies and then they start to dwell
in them and often for hundreds of hours
so the the kids again who shot up the
Coline high school they dwelt in a
fantasy world for hundreds of hours
before they undertook their Dreadful
actions right but you can also flip back
back into yourself let's say and you can
this is like this is like confession and
atonement it's the proper way to think
about it is you can think about what it
is that you did wrong or insufficiently
that led to the collapse of your plan
right so that's the first investigation
I made some sacrifices I attempted to
bring about a particular form of the
future it didn't happen okay why well
the world is set against me and the
cosmos is evil and there's no God and
I'm bitter and cynical that's one
potential explanation right poor me
right and and I'm not trying to be
flippant about this because sometimes
people's dreams are quite realistic and
they still fail catastrophically you
know it can be brutal you know maybe you
did make a lot of good decisions and you
suddenly got ill or someone in your
family did and everything went to hell
on you it doesn't have to be because
you've done something cardinally foolish
that you fail you know it's built into
the structure of the world but doesn't
matter you can also Retreat into and you
can say something like all right I need
to retool my conception of strategy but
also potentially my conception of goal
you know maybe I'm looking in the wrong
place maybe I have to look somewhere
else and you can open yourself up to a
revelation so there's a gospel statement
that's very relevant to this so Christ
tells his followers that if they knock
the door will open if they ask they'll
receive and if they seek they'll find
and so it sounds like it sounds magical
it sounds like like the sort of thing
that the new atheists would have a field
day with but that isn't that's not an
wise interpretation of that saying the
proper interpretation is something more
like a recognition of the way thought
works so imagine your plans didn't work
out okay now you sit down and you say to
yourself I'd like to
know even if the world was conspiring
against me and my failure was 95% % the
fault of external occurrences and other
people what did I do that wasn't as good
as it could have been and where did I
fail to look so that the probability of
my failure was higher now now to ask
that question you have to want the
answer that's that's what it means to
knock or to ask or to seek this this is
no joke it's like you have to want to
know and it's a very painful thing to do
because especially if you had given it
you're all to the degree you are
able and you have reason to be
bitter you're going to be searching for
the errors that you still made and
discovering your own errors is always
extremely painful right especially if
they're errors that you're in love with
and so you have to be willing to strip
yourself down that's what humility means
fundamentally and then but the advantage
is this is why it's so useful to listen
to people you might find out where
you're
stupid and then you could start stop
being stupid and so one of the reasons
you confess your sins let's say is
because you want to discover where
you're insufficient now it's painful you
know it's painful to encounter an
impediment in the form of someone else's
opinion that might show you where you're
blind and ignorant or willfully blind
even but the advantage to that is you
can rectify the error and then as you
move forward you're stronger you know
one of the things I taught my kids and I
hope Le at least somewhat successfully
was that
you should always ask a stupid question
and and that doesn't mean the sort of
question that someone who wasn't paying
attention would
ask if you're listening to
someone and you don't understand what
they're saying and you reveal that
you're revealing your ignorance you know
and maybe you're in a room full of
people and you think you're the only
person stupid enough to not get it which
is very rarely the case by the way the
thing is though if you if you reveal
that ignorance to yourself and to the
other person they can Rectify it and if
you do that a thousand times you're not
ignorant anymore and and this is a real
Pathway to success too you see it you do
this because you ask real questions in
your podcast and Rogan does this okay
Rogan's always trying to be a little
smarter than he already is and then that
works iterated like if you ask a
thousand dumb questions and you listen
to the answer then you know a thousand
things some of them deep that you didn't
know before so that's the that's the
advantage to searching your soul let's
say for the for unrequited sins and
attempting to atone that's not a
delusion right it's an attempt to set
yourself right it's the opposite of a
delusion even though there can be a
Fantastical element to it yeah the uh
conversation around people who try their
best do as many things right as they
could and yet still fall short because
the world is random and and unfortunate
things happen happiness as far as I can
see it sits in the gap between
your expectations and
reality but the problem here is that
people who have high standards often end
up feeling a lack right how can people
who strive like this avoid feeling
despondent at falling short of their own
high standards I've heard you talk about
the Statue of David saying something
like you are not all that you could be
yeah and as soon as you posit an ideal
you begin to compare yourself to that
ideal so well part that's a good
question I mean um the ultimate ideal is
also the ultimate judge because the
ultimate ideal is is something against
which you fall far short and that might
be so painful that you can barely stand
it but then what you do is you you you
two things I suppose is you lower the
ideal and you raise your estimation of
your Poss of your potential and what do
I mean by lower the ideal well if you're
you're comparing yourself to someone or
even to a future self and the Gap is so
painful that it paralyzes you then
you've created a dragon that you don't
have the tools to master and so what you
have to do is you have to scale the
dragon down to size and you want to
scale the dragon down to size until it's
a size that you are willing to move
toward however small that is now you
know if you're here and you're deal is
here and that Gap is unbearable then you
reduce the Gap and you reduce the Gap
and you're going to have to do that
anyways because you're not going to move
from where you are to perfect in one
Fell Swoop right there's going to be
incremental steps so you have to fill in
that that hierarchy of
progression
with with a high enough resolution
representation so that you can start to
move forward and and then you should be
butress there's another gospel comment
that's very interesting it has to do
it's called the Matthew principle and
the Matthew principle is to those who
have everything more will be given and
from those who have nothing everything
will be taken now it's brutal because it
implies that reality works like this
when you're moving up you go like this
right and that's pretty nice that's a
lot better than this but when you're
going down you go like that right it's
like downhill downhill Cliff okay so you
want to avoid the downhill path well if
the uphill path is like this which is
like exponential let's say or geometric
then what that means is
that it doesn't matter how big the first
steps you take uphill are even if
they're trivial even if they're shameful
in their in their size because you're so
useless that if you're if you're
disciplined in that you'll speed up
extraordinarily rapidly and so that's
the good news you might say is that you
can take very small step STS even ones
that might be shameful in their size and
you have to admit that to yourself but
once you get the ball rolling it doesn't
roll in a linear fashion it rolls in a
geometric fashion and this is a really
good thing to know because it can take
the sting out of the realization of your
own stupidity it's like yeah you know
everybody has their weak sides let's say
things they're embarrassed about when I
first started going to the gym I was
like how old was I 198 5 23 and I think
I weighed 135 lbs and I was F 6'1 very
very thin a TW right 27 inch waist
something like that I smoked like mad
and I drank too much like I wasn't in
good shape the
first the first attempts forward I took
in the gym I went to this swim sze class
Jesus it was me and this like really fat
guy young guy probably not in any worse
shape than me and like seven old women
over 70 and they could outswim me like
it was pretty damn humiliating and so I
did a semester of that and got myself in
somewhat better shape and then I started
to go to the gym to work out to lift
weights and that was also rough because
you know I'd be underneath the bloody
bench press trying to lift 75 lbs off
the off the rests and you know some
muscle-headed bastard would come over
and tell me how to do it and it's like
yeah thank you but you know it's
embarrassing and lots of times people
won't do things like go to the gym
because they're so embarrassed about how
they look or what sort of shape they're
in and it's a pain to start at the
bottom
but you start at the bottom where you're
weak and if you want to rectify what's
weak you have to accept the fact that
you're at the bottom and that the first
steps are going to be painful you know I
it took me about 3 years but I stopped
smoking and then I stopped drinking and
I gained 40 lbs of in like 3 and a half
years something like that I basically
had to stop doing that cuz I had to eat
like six times a day it was crazy but I
got a lot more physically confident and
a lot
more coordinated cuz working out with
dumbbells makes you coordinated right
because it it exercises all the small
ligaments and the tendons and so my
lower body in particular got a lot more
coordinated then I could dance so that
was better when I was going out dancing
because I did a lot of that in graduate
school and but the point of all this is
if you're going to rectify your
weaknesses you have to admit your
insufficiency to your own shame now if
the gap between you and your ideal is so
great that it paralyzes you you shrink
that right we'll get back to talking to
Jordan in one minute but first I need to
tell you about Maui NE venison Maui Nei
venison is the most protein dense and
nutrient-dense red meat on the planet
thank you plus they're the only
stress-free 100% wild harvested meat
available
my favorite method for cooking it is
straight from Frozen salt the hell out
of both sides 12 minutes in an air fryer
at maximum temperature turn it over 12
minutes again and it is perfect every
single time it is such a life hack
actually taught to me by Jordan's
daughter Michaela and all she does is
eat meat so that's the way to do it all
of the cuts are spectacular but their
venison sticks have been my new favorite
while I've been traveling on the road
you can get the healthiest red meat on
the planet delivered directly to your
door by following the link in the show
notes below or going to mauw venison
docomo wisdom using the code modern
wisdom at checkout that's 20% off by
going to M aui Nui venison tocom wisdom
and modern wisdom at
checkout one of the things I've been
talking about in the live shows is your
comparison group is incorrect the fact
that you know we have the opportunity to
sit down and listen to anybody on the
planet right the best Minds the best
athletes the best thinkers the most
articulate that are alive right now or
listen to the people that have died that
were around when video cameras existed
and you can compare yourself to that
group yeah but that's not your
comparison group if you have the impetus
to sit down and listen to me and you
waffle on for three hours about these
deep topics these interesting ideas you
are so already selected out of the
normal group you're already already
asking yourself questions that almost
nobody almost nobody else is right but
because your comparison group of people
that are unbelievably High performing I
remember before I started my podcast I'd
listen to to you or to Sam or to Joe and
I'd think God that recall is is amazing
it's so it's like that they they've just
got this identic memory and everything
that they've ever read is able to come
to the surface and they're able to say
it in this way that's completely
seamless and all the rest of it you go
okay well are you really person that's
never recorded a podcast before going to
compare yourself to Joe Rogan man that's
recorded a thousand and spent 10,000
hours on stage and done all of this UFC
commentary and done all of this stuff in
terms of TV is that really who you're
going to compare yourself to and it's
unfair and the problem that I see is
people who have big dreams for
themselves and want to do great things
they like to set their sights High yeah
and yet they feel despondent In the
comparison so I think well there's a
pride in that too e like can be I want
to be well or that's who I should be
comparing myself to right that's the
pride and the pride is something like I
should be that or even I could be that
it's like well maybe you could but
you're certainly not going to do it as
you already pointed out without the
apprenticeship right so you could say
that the despondency is actually is is
in proportion to the to the false Pride
now I wrote a chapter in I think my
first book which was compare yourself to
who you are today not to who someone
else is it's sorry I I mangled out to
some degree but you get the point the
proper comparison group for you is you
yesterday because you can make first of
all you're the you're your you're the
only control group that's appropriate to
you because you have a certain set of
talents and possibilities and
limitations and tragedies that are truly
unique to you and so you might be
comparing yourself to someone else on
some Dimension but it's not a reasonable
comparison because you don't know what
talents they were blessed with and you
also don't know what opportunities they
had that you didn't Etc it's just not a
reasonable comparison it's a lot better
to think about who you were and then to
think well could you be somewhat better
in some Dimension and the the positive
thing about that is the answer is almost
always yes now you can Orient that
transformation towards some Stellar
Target and that a reasonable thing to do
but that doesn't exactly mean that you
should compare yourself to that Target
aiming at something and comparing
yourself to it are not exactly the same
thing plus your bloody comparison is
also a delusion you know that's another
thing that you have to understand is
that you look at the person you're
jealous of and really what you're doing
is you're you're looking through a very
narrow aperture at a very thin slice of
their life you're looking at the thin
slice of their life that's turning out
the best but you're also looking at a
thin slice of their life that's marketed
to be the best right and you have no
idea what the horror of that person's
life might be in its totality and you
have no idea if like if the deal was say
you wanted to
be Russell Brand there's a good example
you want it to be Russell Brand you want
it to be as charismatic and as famous as
he is well your real
wish is that you get to have everything
Russell Brand has but none of his
problems well come on I mean that's just
it's just it's no wonder that a vision
like that would make you despondent
because it's it's naive it's resentful
it's jealous it's bitter and it's
unreasonable you have to take the good
with the bad you have to take the bad
with the good and people very rarely
think about that when they're thinking
about you know the famous people they
think they'd like like to be there was a
recent interview with Elon Musk where he
said something my mind is a storm I
don't think most people would want to be
me right they may think they would want
to be me but they don't they don't know
they don't understand what do you think
of that elon's someone that people
probably look up to and admire and
aspire to be one of the downsides to
high level genius is you might describe
it as hypermania
so here's a simple test that people can
do so this is a test of something called
verbal fluency and verbal fluency is
associated with creativity and so a ver
here's a simple verb verbal fluency test
write down as many four-letter words as
you can in three minutes that begin with
t okay that's that's pretty constrained
four letters and T or or write down as
many words as you can in three minutes
to begin with S that's less constrained
all right so
there's quite a powerful correlation
between the sheer number of words that
you produce and your lifetime creative
achievement right especially in the
artistic and verbal
domains that's different than vocabulary
vocabulary is how many words you
understand fluency is how many words you
can produce in a given Dey of those
words yeah well people vary to a degree
that you can hardly imagine so some
people if you get them to do the
four-letter test in 3 minutes they'll
write down like 12 words and some will
write down
150 and the ones who are writing down
150 their minds are going at a hypomanic
rate they're just thinking five times as
fast yeah without any remission
whatsoever and you know when that gets
completely out of control you have manic
you have someone who's Manic and there's
nothing fun about manic that's where the
word maniac comes from from and someone
whose manic has a thousand different
plans Each of which are one sentence
long that they're hyper enthusiastic
about they'll spend every scent of their
money pursuing them and things just go
immediately to hell and so that's the
that's the outer limit of pathology on
the creative front and someone like musk
who's clearly a genius that's what he's
contending with in his internal
landscape now I'm not saying that he's
manic because I see no signs of that but
someone that creative is on that edge or
you see someone like Ben Shapiro I mean
it's very interesting to talk to Ben
because and Russell Brand is the same
way Shapiro speaks I think more rapidly
than anyone I ever met but if you're
with him you see very clearly that he's
probably thinking five times that fast
and that's a lot and when I was writing
maps of meaning which was my first book
I had a very difficult time shutting off
my mind I was obsessed with that book
and so I was writing about three hours a
day and then I was thinking about the
material like for 12
hours as and the thoughts came
as way faster than thinking they
probably came about as fast as I can
read I can read about 12200 words a
minute if the material isn't
overwhelmingly dense and so it was just
nonstop thought for like 16 hours a day
that's part of the reason I started
lifting weights because if I was lifting
heavy enough think 12200 words a minute
while I've got 100 pound on my back it
was enough it was enough to shut it down
and it was also one of the reasons that
I drank because that was another thing
that would shut it off yeah well I I
think the price that people pay to be
the person that you admire is just such
an interesting frame to look at someone
like Elon Musk my mind is a storm I
don't think most people would want to be
me the price that you would have to pay
in order to be me is not one that you
would but you're one of the richest men
on the planet and you get to you know
dance on stage and and release cars that
bu proof and put rockets in space and
stuff well yeah but what about all of
the baggage what's the price what's well
he also he also appears to me to be
hyper conscientious and I know people
who've worked with him like musk isn't
just a creative genius he's also an
extremely conscientious engineer which
and really conscientious Engineers they
have very interesting Minds I like
talking to Engineers because my
brother-in-law is a great engineer and
when when he understands something Jim
when he understands something thing he
understands how to build it out of atoms
right like he understands it at every
single level and musk appears to me to
be someone who's this rare combination
of hyper creative but also hyper
conscientious and I know that he works
all the time yeah does that sort of uh
hypertrophied executive function help to
Wrangle some of the diffuse Creative
Energy oh we're going to put it into
this one thing at least for a while and
then we'll move on to another thing yes
yes definitely definitely you Eric
Weinstein's a good example of someone I
hope Eric isn't annoyed by this but Eric
is unbelievably creative but he's not
particularly conscientious and so his
and and I think he found an occupation
where that works extremely well because
he's he I don't know if he's still doing
this but he worked with Peter teal for
quite a long time as his idea man right
and Eric's an extremely interesting
person musk is hyper creative and as far
as I can tell hyper conscientious and
the conscientiousness does Focus you
know it it and and that lots of people
who are creative aren't conscientious
well it's rare like if you're one in the
there's no correlation between
creativity and
conscientiousness okay so if you're one
in a thousand if you're the most
creative person in a thousand and you're
the most conscientious person in a
thousand you're one person in a million
and musk is probably more like one
person in a 100 million right something
like that maybe more but or maybe a
billion right
maybe yeah it's interesting to consider
the changes that happen to people as
well as they as that their platforms as
the scrutiny around them continues to
increase obviously this has been a
journey for you over the last you know
nearly approaching 10 years now of was
it 2006 was that pH c16 2016 2016 yeah
sorry um how have you found Fame change
you what's been impacted or changed due
to the the scrutiny and the surveillance
and the Adoration and the
criticism well the first thing that
changed I think was that I saw misery on
a scale that I hadn't really seen it
before you know I had worked as a
clinician for a long time and i' worked
with say 20 people a week and I was
always in the realm of difficult
existential problems wrestling
with my clients's problems alongside of
them and I liked that a lot and then I
had my research and I had my family and
various business interests and so that
misery in some ways was contained and
boxed in and I had a lot of structure
around that to be able to function
despite the fact that you know I was
neck deep in 20 people's serious
problems which I really like by the way
when when I started speaking on a larger
scale and meeting more and more
people this scale of demoralization
really hit me I didn't know that I
didn't know how deep the demoralization
in our culture had become and I think
that was especially obvious to me at
that point among young men now it looks
like this is Jonathan Height's research
is indicating this that possibly young
women are even in worse shape but for
whatever reason most most of the people
I was meeting at least to begin with
were young men I think it was probably
because most of them far more people on
YouTube are young men and
so the it was shocking and brutal to see
how much
demoralization
how widely spread the demoralization in
our culture
was other than that and that that was a
real shock and it it was very hard on me
I would say um
everything else about it has been at
minimum ridiculously
interesting I have an unbelievable
wealth of opportunity I'd be a fool to
be anything but abjectly grateful I mean
the misery that I saw was a shock and it
hurt me and it it was part of what made
how did that how did that impact you did
it change the way that you see the world
at
all it made me understand more deeply
how important it was to offer people an
encouraging
word I could see that so many people
were
dying psychologically or actually for
lack of an encouraging word and so it
made being in the position to provide
that much
more necessary mean part of the reason
that Tammy and I too are const
LLY is because it seems to be good it
seems to be a good thing you know we've
even seen changes in the audience so
five years ago six years ago when we did
our first tour a lot of the people who
came to the talks were in pretty rough
shape there were more men than there are
now like the proportion of men to women
was higher and the men were generally
there alone and they were a lot of them
were looking pretty ragged around the
edges and now five years later half the
audience comes in suits like it's as if
they're dressed for a wedding most of
the guys are there with some woman um
the the audience members are doing much
better and the lecture events are
extremely positive you know if you
looked at my life from the outside you'd
think that I was in a constant storm of
you know aggravated controversy but all
of that virtually all of that is virtual
it's just in the online world now it
touches the actual World from time to
time because I am being pursued by my
regulatory College inario yeah yeah yeah
which is you know mostly just an
annoyance and a Preposterous annoyance a
Preposterous expensive and timec
consuming annoyance but apart from
that everything that's happened around
me has
been positive H that's a strange thing
too
positive at such an intensity that even
that is
daunting you know you'd
think it's hard to imagine that you
could be in a situation where things are
so positive that you can barely stand it
but but I am in that situation and it's
quite something to contend with I I was
fortunate I suppose to some degree that
it didn't happen to me till I was old CU
I've never really I've never really got
accustomed to it I've had a thought
about this observing what's happened to
you and you know the Weinstein are a
good example of this too we often hear
the Perils of getting Fame too young the
McCoy Culkin of the world the Britney
Spears of the world you know uh
individuals who don't have any sense of
identity being thrust into a
non-representative experience of the
world and they're completely
unmowed but I think that there's an
equally interesting question to ask okay
and what happens if you think you know
who you are if you've spent de decades
five decades six Decades of your life
understanding your place your status the
trajectory that you're on and then out
of nowhere you get ripped away from all
of the areas of reference all of the way
markers that you thought you knew and
now you're just floating in the air I
imagine that could be even more
disquieting in some ways
well when everything blew up around me
to begin with it was stressful I would
say because my job was on the light my
university job and I never thought that
would happen I
mean my when I worked at Harvard Anna at
the University of
Toronto that was all positive like I
really liked working with my graduate
students I had at least cordial
relationships with my with my fellow
faculty members at Harvard they were
more than cordial at the University of
Toronto most of the faculty members that
I started to develop friendships with
were also those who ended up moving away
and so and they were often people who
got offers from other places and you
know they they would disappear and so a
lot of the friends I developed at the
University of Toronto went elsewhere and
so I didn't get as tightly tied
in with regards to Friendship networks
among my peers as I had at Harvard for
example but I had great relationships
with undergraduates and with my graduate
students that was plenty like I loved
working with my graduate students and so
it wasn't like I was pining and alone
not at all and I had a good network of
friends and
um and so then that was threatened and
really disappeared in
2016 um and my clinical practice was
threatened and so that was
unsettling I think there were things
that continued though even when I was
teaching as a university Professor the
way I taught
wasn't
typical the things I taught weren't
typical I thought for decades you know
eventually someone's going to find out
what I'm teaching and and you know
there's going to be trouble I couldn't
believe I was allowed
encouraged to teach what I was teaching
um but you know the universities and
this was particularly true of Harvard in
the
90s that's how they were structured what
was so rebellious about what what you
were
teaching well there wasn't really
anybody who was concentrating on the
Nexus between say architect
ideas archetypal and religious ideas in
Neuroscience so that wasn't a thing I
mean there was a few people Yak panp was
one of them who a lot of the researchers
who were interested in the Neuroscience
of emotion became interested in deep
narrative because they started to
understand that our emotional life is a
story that's a good way of thinking
about it and that we're guided you know
we're Guided by our emotional instincts
and what are emotional instincts do is
put us into certain stories that's what
it means to be in love for example is
that you're in a love story and it's not
it's not uh a particular balance of
oxytocin and endorphins that you are
aware of it's not broken down to its
constituent Parts no definitely not part
of a narrative that you tell yourself
about what this means and how this feels
right right well and it's interesting
that the Instinct manifests itself as a
story and so I was very interested in
narrative and story and I and also see
no psychologist study Carl Yung like
literally virtually none really now oh
yeah yeah oh definitely not I mean
psychology psychology really developed
in some ways as the materialist
antithesis to
psychoanalysis so Freud and Yung and
even Adler to some degree they were off
limits for
for scientifically trained behavioral
psychologists and that's what I was and
am like I trained at Migel there were no
courses in psychoanalytic theory at Mill
I read Freud and Yung completely on my
own uh flying in the face of the advice
that I was getting even from my
well-meaning graduate supervisor who was
a great guy and who never got in my way
in the least quite the contrary but I
was warned for example when I went on
the job market not to talk about the
things that I was truly interested in
and I ignored that by the way and what
that meant was some places that I went
to apply for a job didn't want me but
then Harvard did so that worked out
quite nicely you know and that's one of
the advantages too also of being true to
your own vision is that you won't get
what you don't want see I didn't want to
go work somewhere where they wouldn't
want me I wanted to go work somewhere
where they wanted me so my strategy was
well this is who I am and if you don't
want me you know that's a drag because
I'm looking for a job but by the same
token I'm not going to pretend to be
someone other than who I am so I can
work here what a stupid way of starting
your career well that goes back to the
truth right telling the truth what are
you going to if you tell a sufficiently
seductive lie what is the best that you
can hope for right the person that
you're telling the lie to falls in love
with a projection right right absolutely
well when I applied to graduate school I
wrote a crazy admissions letter and I
basically out who I was flaws and all
and what I was interested in and two
people three people bit and the one that
I liked best partly because he was at
Mill and I wanted to be in Montreal was
my graduate supervisor Robert Peele and
he knew what he was getting and we had a
great time I still work with him like I
had one of the best relationships with
Bob that I've ever had with anyone in my
life and it's lasted four decades and it
was because
like Bob's a very honest person we were
very different he's very practical he's
a very good administrator managerial
type although he's he's super smart he
had an exhaustive knowledge of the
relevant
research psychology literature and I
came in you know flying on a mat of
psychoanalytic theory and philosophy and
religious ideas very very different
although we shared a real deep interest
in the practicalities of research and he
taught me how to fall in love with the
more scientific end of the research
distribution but the point I'm making is
that he knew he knew what he was getting
right from the beginning and so did I
and that worked like a charm there was
no re reason for any sort of subterfuge
and it turned out that our his talents
and mine dovetailed extremely well so
and we had a blast I loved working with
well like that's why we been working
together for 40 years I traveled all
over North America with because we also
started a business and uh it was great
it was
great the thing is you know if you tell
people who you are and an opportunity
opens up it opens up for you yes not for
this thing you've created this lie this
this story that Douglas Murray told me
about one of his first bosses at an
early newspaper that he worked at I
can't remember the gentleman's
name this guy is a legend within the
industry he's been working for a long
time he's accumulated a number of uh
haters and and fans and toward the back
end of his career as Douglas is starting
his he decides that he wants to release
a West End play about the life of Prince
Charles in rhyming
couplets adventurous as as West End
plays go and obviously there was all of
this scrutiny because he was this very
welln individual within the publishing
world and uh opening night by the
halftime interval there was no one left
in the entire Auditorium including the
cast
and this guy was devastated right and he
was mocked in the press and all the rest
of it apparently Douglas saw him shortly
afterward and asked him kindly he was
like look like what were you thinking
West End play about the life of Prince
Charles and [ __ ] rhyming couplets he
said well Douglas I followed my
instincts and instincts that may
sometimes Lead You Wrong mhm but they're
the only thing that's ever led you right
right right and that stuck with me
because yeah well well there there
there's something very relevant there
too on the instinctual front Okay so
things will beckon to you and call to
you and you'll have intuitions about
which pathway to take and you will in
all likelihood follow those because what
else do you have you have these
orienting
instincts this is another reason why you
don't
lie CU if you lie and you practice lying
you pathologize your instincts and then
your intuitions lead you wrong and so
there's a sin that's laid out in the
gospels it's the sin against the Holy
Ghost and it's unforgivable and people
have been debating for like 2,000 years
about what this particular sin is but
it's something
like the pathologization of the
instincts that Orient you if you
sacrifice your relationship to the truth
you warp your vision and then you can't
see and then one day it'll be dark and
there'll be sharp things in the fall in
front of you and you'll wander right
into them because you've pathologized
your own Vision yeah you don't want to
lie because you you program yourself
falsely and then you automatically see
what isn't there and then of course the
world will slap you in the face
continually and you'll think oh my God
the world's such a pathological place
when the truth of the matter is is that
no you just keep running into things
that you refuse to see and then you
think well the world's made of nothing
but obstacles it's like well you put the
obstacles in your own path and you did
that by developing these complex
self-serving delusions a story that you
tell other people about who you are that
isn't true you're trying to lay out a
map that bears no relationship to
reality and you keep wondering why you
wander off the path and into a pit it's
like well how could it be otherwise if
see if you really un this people have
commented to me many times about my
bravery and I I I don't like that I it's
it's it's not
right I'm afraid of different things
than the typical person maybe that's a
good way of thinking about it I'm way
more afraid of the consequences of
saying something that's false or
wandering off the appropriate path than
I am of whatever consequences might come
for saying what I believe and doing what
I believe to be the case I'm way more
afraid of that you
know I've been reading the gospel of St
Matthew I'm I'm writing a book at the
moment called we who wrestle with God
and one of the things Christ says to
people continually is to not damage
their vision is to not
put that's the best way of putting it
don't olude your eye you can see what's
in front of you if you're willing to see
it and if you're willing to see it the
terrible OB many of the terrible
obstacles in life you can just walk
around but if you blind yourself
purposefully to follow your own narrow
self-serving delusion you're going to
run into terrible things and terrible
people and the terrible part of your own
soul all the time that's what you should
be afraid of well the best thing that
you can hope for if you do do that is to
fluke success living somebody else's
life right right great wonderful
yeah exactly you get to be you get to be
a successful fraud I remember this
documentary about Ron Jeremy I think
they called him the Hedgehog he was this
famous porn star I've seen a music video
with him in yeah yeah okay not one of
the world's most attractive people
physically and you know he lived in this
very interesting world he lived in this
world he was stopped constantly on the
street by people who thought Ron Jeremy
was a
hero right so he was in hell because
the people who admired him were the
people who
admired he was surrounded by the people
who thought that he was an avatar of of
success right and so he got what he
wanted I
suppose he had easy access to easy women
in other news this episode is brought to
you by manscaped if you are a gentleman
who is still using an old face shaver
from three Christmases ago to trim your
gentleman's area what are you doing join
us here in the modern world there are
purpose built tools for the job and the
brand new lawn mower 5.0 Ultra is the
tool that you need it's got a Cutting
Edge ceramic blade to reduce grooming
accidents a 90-minute battery so that
you can take a longer shave waterproof
technology so that you can groom in the
shower and an LED light which
illuminates grooming areas for a closer
and more precise trim or if you just
want to do it in the dark like a ninja
would going into the holiday season you
might want to get the man in your life a
gift or hint at him that he's a tiny bit
more hairy than you would like and the
manscaped lawn mower 5.0 Ultra is the
perfect blending of these two worlds so
since we're on YouTube I can't show you
how this actually works but what I can
show you is that transformation right
there that's you gentlemen unwrap the
gift of smoothness this season by going
to the link in the description below or
heading to manscaped.com wisdom using
the code wisdom a checkout for 20% off
and free shipping that's manscape.com
wisdom and wisdom at checkout well let
me give you let me give you this this is
why I think the beginning of the incel
movement and the black pill movement was
born out of pick a partistry the origin
if you trace it back using internet
history of the incel blackpill uh
ideology was a I think it a subreddit or
a website called Pua hate pickup artist
hate and what it was was a group of men
who had been through the pipeline of
pickup Artistry yeah and come out the
other side with a very jaded and even
more jaded view of the world even more
jaded yes and I'll tell you why so what
happened Happ s if a guy learns old
school mid2 norts pickup
Artistry is you realize that there is a
particular set of actions a script that
you can run which makes it more likely
that a woman is going to go to bed with
you right right right right but what you
realize when you do that as you learn
how to neg and do Kino escalation and
tell them that story about the [ __ ]
fight outside or whatever your script is
that you're running you then begin to
see just how far away that person is
from the person that you actually show
up as right who you are and this
extravagant Persona that you need to
convolute into existence in order to get
this woman into bed makes you feel worse
even F the gap between where you are and
what you have to do in order to achieve
the thing that you want now what you
don't realize is that there are a
million other ways that you could become
sufficiently Charming to get this person
to like you this is by actually doing it
example this is just one that happens to
be robust and easy enough to write down
in a book and easy enough for it's
basically a form of scripted
psychopathy so what a psychopath does is
feain competence right so most
psychopaths are very emotionally stable
and so one of
the early stage markers for competence
is self-possession and calmness and so
if you're not an anxious person you've
got an edge on that already and most
psychopaths are very high in emotional
stability and so they look confident
because confident people tend not to be
that nervous like if you're doing
something you're expert at well you're
not nervous because you know how to do
it okay so the lack of nervousness is a
hint to competence well you can feain
that you can feain competence you can
feain confidence that's what the pickup
artists teach now I would say there's
even some utility and what they do right
because if you're dependent and bitter
and resentful and charmless and
self
destructive and nervous and socially
unskilled the probability that you're
going to be successful with women is
very very low okay so you should be
other than who you are now if you start
putting on this Persona then you could
think about that as a new suit of
clothes and you could learn through
through that how to fill in the gaps
take it until you make it absolutely
absolutely but if you take on that
without doing the effort necessary to
integrate that in a genuine way then all
that's happening is that you're you're
being rewarded for being fake yeah right
and that's part of the problem with that
too is that you're practicing learning
how to manipulate people in a
psychopathic way and if you practice
that of course you're going to become
jaded like there's nothing more jaded
than a psychopath
I mean that's that's the ultimate
extreme of jadedness and if you practice
manipulating especially if the women
happen to be reasonably good women if
you practice manipulating them and
you're successful then you're learning
to be one you're learning to be one
horrible person now you know as your
completely useless unproductive and
undesirable former self you weren't
exactly Stellar to begin with but
substituting psychopathy for that what
sort of like substituting cynicism for
naivity now that's a complex problem I
mean part of the reason that people like
Andrew Tate are so attractive to young
guys is because they do put up
that
confident that false confidence Tate's a
complicated guy because it's not all
false you know real people are
complicated the way that like villains
in in comic books
aren't hates a fighter it's clearly the
case that he's got a certain degree of
physical bravery that's real all
right there's an element of what he says
that's very attractive to bed bedroom
basement dwelling losers because he's at
least there out in the world you know
taken the blows and he's got a fast car
and he's flashy and he's attractive to
women but a lot of what he's done
especially with women doesn't just
border into the psychopathic it crosses
the line and that's not a good model
it's not an optimal model for people who
are trying to progress but it's a
strange thing because just as cynicism
is an improvement over naivity right the
capacity to be dark is an improvement
over the lack of ability to be dark at
all and so Tate is attractive in the way
that the shadow beckons to people who
are undeveloped right because it does
it's like you're you're neurotic and
you're dependent and you're repressed
because you're immature and harmless
well one way out of that is to stop
being harmless and one of the things you
can say about Tate is that he's not
harmless right well that's that's a it's
a virtue now it's a virtue that has to
be bracketed it's like cynicism is a
virtue compared to naivity but it's not
it's not virtuous in and of itself it's
a step on the way and so maybe you can
learn how to Fain confidence and you can
learn how that works and maybe that's an
improvement I had a guy in my clinical
practice who got involved with the
pickup artist community and he told me
taught me a lot about it and one of the
exercises that their initiates had to do
was to go out and ask 50 women for their
phone number in one day and that's a
great exercise you know and I'm not
exposure therapy approach anxiety
absolutely absolutely getting over your
fear of rejection right and 50 times
they'll do that because you're going to
get rejected the vast majority of times
likely 50 times although generally that
wasn't people's experience you know if
if they were even vaguely skilled they'd
at least get a false phone number out of
the deal but then they could they learn
that the rejection wasn't as
catastrophic as they thought but more
importantly they learned that they could
continue moving forward in the face of
rejection so the thing that it makes me
think about there is intellectual
humility and how tightly people hold on
to their beliefs that if you believe
that you are always is going to be right
that there is nothing to learn outside
of you and that any kind of admission
that you might be wrong is tant amount
to destruction it does exactly the same
thing you need to and it goes back to uh
asking stupid questions being prepared
to ask the stupid questions and look not
like the most informed person in the
room but also importantly nowhere near
the most stupid person in the room
because you're the one that's asking the
question well the stupidest person in
the room is the person who doesn't know
and won't ask or even worse who doesn't
know and won't ask and acts like they
know that's not good at all yeah there's
a from your see that's part of that idea
that you should love your enemy so you
might say well why should you do that
well your enemy is going to be your
harshest
critic now it's possible that if you
have a very good enemy that he will show
you flaws in your character that you
didn't know were there and so that's a
it's a
very it's a very strange way of looking
at the world to think that you should
welcome an attack you should it and this
is but this is right it yeah I'm saying
that with all due caution let's
say the most the more vicious the
attack the more of your potential hidden
flaws might be revealed have you found
that to be true oh definitely but I've
also found
that the attacks force you to contend
with it to to see if it's there right to
to test it I suppose the attacks that
have come after me that have been most
successful they they're almost always
journalists and they're usually British
female journalists but not always we
produce a a nation of hardhead
journalists yeah well and faith in
journalists is the lowest in the UK and
anywhere in the western world and I can
see why you know but there's some
Advantage there's some real advantage to
facing someone it's a Pharisee problem
in in the
gospels Christ was always contending
with these Pharisees and what the
Pharisees were always trying to do was
to lay a verbal trap for him so is a
Pharisee a person Pharisee was a was a
Jewish sect okay and the Pharisees were
very legalistic in their interpretation
of Mosaic law and so they were sort of
they were hypocritical the way they're
portrayed in the gospel S as they're
hypocritical by the book moralists and
part of what and most of their morality
was for show they like to pray in public
they like to be seen being holy at least
that's the criticisms that are levied
against them and what they're always
trying to do in the gospel accounts is
to lay a verbal trap for Christ so that
they can expose him as a heretic and
kill them right so every single thing
they say is a snare of some sort and
there's lots of journalists like that
Nelly Bulls who wrote an article about
me for the New York Times which was a
very devastating article in many ways
and
very Serpentine and and
subtle she 3 years
later she wrote another article about
what it was like to work for the New
York Times when she was working there
and the tricks that the journalists
played including her and she said that
the game was to devastate someone else's
reputation in the attempt to boost yours
right so you could think about it as a
game of comparative moral standing so
the journalist's trick is to trick you
into saying something that will end your
career essentially their social status
stands on the shoulders of yours AB
absolutely absolutely and so now the the
advantage to being in a situation like
that is that you have to step if you
step extremely
carefully and you're fortunate then you
evade the traps and then the interview
tilts hard in your favor yeah and so the
most the interviews that have done me
the most good in the long run were the
two interviews that were most hostile
one
by channels 4 Griffin Kathy Kathy new
Kathy Newman Cathy Griffin and Kathy
Kathy at least had a sense of humor
another one by Helen Lewis who had no
sense of humor at all and doesn't seem
to have learned anything at all in the
interim but I think that I think that
one has 80 million views now twice as
many as the Kathy Newman interview like
it just keeps racking up views and it
was because Helen
Lewis she has like 50 tricks or 100
tricks Kathy had like four you know and
they were pretty blunt and she had a
sense of humor about them but Helen
Lewis she was just all tricks and lots
of them and smart you know and it's
quite something to talk to someone who's
quite smart and quite educated but all
tricks and so but how does it feel
looking back on those too they were very
formative time it was kind of the
inflection point or one of the
inflection points I suppose for yourself
as well yeah how does it feel looking
back on that I remember you said at the
time it took you many days to recover
from that kind of cantankerous sort of
adversarial interview is that does that
seem like a different lifetime or is
that still very much sort of with you
well I'm a lot healthier than I was then
so those sorts of things wouldn't have
the same effect on me now as they did
then because I was Ill it took me a long
time to recover from you know serious
bout I mean the first time I talked to
Sam Harris not that Sam played tricks
like I like Sam and we've had very
productive
conversations I was so ill when the
first time I talked to Sam that I could
barely sit in my chair talking to Sam
Harris makes you ill that's the No No
not not at all no no Sam and I have had
very productive conversations that was
another good example I suppose of the
utility of an adversarial conversation
yeah you know I mean Sam comes to a
conversation like that pretty well armed
but it's very helpful because it forces
you to look in nooks and crannies that
you might not have looked in and to be
crystal clear to the degree that that's
possible about what you're actually
saying the idea of of loving your enemy
is something I've been playing with a
little bit recently there been I guess
my platform's getting to the level now
where uh there's a reason for someone to
have a bullseye pointed at least
remotely in my direction because there's
no point in trying to take somebody down
that's got nothing that's got no status
why would you why would you invest the
time your the step that you're going to
get in terms of your status standing on
their shoulders is so small that no one
so it's a backhanded compliment yeah in
some ways yeah um but you're right man
some of the some of the criticisms that
I've got I was reminded by a friend
recently about this uh have been some of
the best inflection points very
uncomfortable and to see it as a gift to
think about that thing as a gift it's
like I know that you weren't doing this
to make me better yeah I know that you
weren't doing this to try and to try and
benefit me and yet and yet yeah in
reflection it's like Alchemy it's like
how Rory Sutherland calls it Alchemy
taking something that was bad I I had
this reflection as well well we we've
learned my family's learned like when
when a public attack occurs there's a
massive opportunity nested in it if you
can reorient it's like okay this is bad
this is vicious this is not this does
not look good and maybe it could take me
out take us out is there a way is there
a way we can play with this that will
not only neutralize it but twist it in
the other direction I think the thing we
did that was most effective on that side
of things was when I was written into
Captain America as I spoke to you that
day I spoke to you that day that it
happened yeah the magical magical super
Nazi floating Nazi or whatever yeah yeah
yeah well it was shocking right it was
it was very shocking and then Olivia
wild yeah the that was shocking too yeah
yeah there's a Litany of yes yes well
and it it became increasingly
Preposterous and and the Olivia wild
episode was one of the that was so
Preposterous that it was almost
immediately laugh mercifully that film
was so badly made and I'm pretty sure
that she'd cast her boyfriend as one of
the got rid of someone that was super
competent and put somebody in that was
pretty incompetent uh and I think that
that kind of caused it to flub but yeah
man the the the thing I've ended up
becoming really good friends with one of
my harshest critics it's so strange uh
and yet makes complete sense afterward
uh you had a how did you end up making
friends so I got criticized uh by a pair
of podcasters who um do this they they
kind of take down or or they have a very
critical eye of much of the of the
podcasting world and they they did an
episode about an episode that I'd done
and have a right of reply thing oh yeah
uh Sam's been on to do it uh who else
has been on to do it I I did it couple
of other Constantin kiss being to do and
um I I went on and there was a bit of
like I listened to their show I think
it's a very Illuminating way to see how
people that have a different perspective
about what's going on in in your world
see it and uh I was like yeah I got the
opportunity to go on and have a
conversation and I did and I found them
to both be like way more Charming than I
thought that they were going to be and
uh I've ended up both Chris and Matt all
Matt l so but with Chris like we must
speak once a month every couple of weeks
we one of us will just ring and we'll
catch up about what's been going on in
the world and he has a very different
sort of worldview to me he lives in a
different area of the world he's a a a
psychologist studying religion I think
and and uh sacred rituals and stuff like
that rituals rather than
religion and now he points out blind
spots that I don't see and that one
particular
instance was and it was really
uncomfortable because this was still
this was three years ago or something
now maybe and I'm still you super
uncomfortable about it and oh my God
these people are going to take me down
and they're both academics and they're
really really well educated and they're
going to be smart and they're going to
say things that make me look silly and I
said things that made me look silly and
picked a particular episode where blah
blah blah and yet in reflection it's
been that one instance and the
subsequent rumination about it was one
of the biggest inflection points for me
going
from having blind spots that I hadn't
seen to that and I I almost think that
the degree of discomfort that I went
through was mandatory because had I not
felt so much like fear and anxiety and
embarrassment about the fact that I'm
going to it's going to be out there and
there's going to be all this focus and
attention in not a nice way and there'll
be tweets and all the rest of the
stuff that was sufficient uncomfortable
to force me to actually genuinely look
at the things that I was doing that I
was getting wrong and I'm sure that
there's a million things I'm still
getting wrong but yeah it was it was as
much a gift as it could be we'll get
back to talking to Jordan in one minute
but first I need to tell you about
element I've used element every single
morning for over three years now it is
the way I start every single day it
tastes fantastic it optimizes my
hydration it helps to regulate my
appetite and it improves my brain health
element contains a science-backed
electrolyte ratio of sodium potassium
and magnesium best of all they've got a
brand new chocolate caramel flavor which
you can have hot hot element I hear you
say what sort of hydration blasphemy is
this but no it tastes fantastic and on
cold mornings it's perfect there is a no
BS no questions asked refund policy so
you can buy it and try it completely
risk-free and if you do not like it for
any reason they will give you your money
back and you don't even need to return
the Box I've used this every single
morning for as long as I can remember
and that orange flavor is phenomenal
plus that chocolate caramel is available
right now if you go to the link in the
show notes below or head to drink LM
nt.com slod wisdom for a free sample
pack of all eight flavors with your
first box that's drink LM nt.com
slod wisdom here's another thing I spoke
to David gogins about this last year
about how uh I was bullied as a kid and
I was quite unpopular in school and I
was an only child so I didn't really
have many people to back me up you know
in the schoolyard or whatever and I for
a long time had a chip on my shoulder
about the kids that mistreated me in
school as you might
expect and then I got toward you know
maybe a few years ago and I really
really started to reflect on it and
realized that so many of the things that
I valued in myself were the light side
of something dark that had been created
during that time in school so um my
complete preparedness to just spend time
on my own means that I don't mind about
moving out to a country where I don't
know anybody and trying to make this
podcast thing work or spending hours and
hours working or researching or
recording podcasts or doing intros or
whatever it is like all of those things
um not having a super tight social
network as a kid meant that I wasn't
beholden to anybody when I grew up that
I I didn't feel the need to have as much
uh um support as I go along to do stuff
now other sides of it haven't been so
great because I still seek validation I
still a lot of validation because that
was something that I was missing as a
kid um but yeah realizing not only you
probably wouldn't be here if it wasn't
for the things that you went through
okay there's step one and then step two
is and I'm quite grateful for what I've
done and then step three would be
something like wow I'm proud of myself
for having turned something that was
negative into something that's positive
but then another level above that would
be
wow so maybe I should be thankful yeah
right well we know we were talking
earlier in the podcast about what is the
appropriate attitude towards the future
and I would say well we could put past
present and future in the same bin say
well one of the things that you want to
do is practice gratitude that's one of
the primary religious rituals you might
say is the practice of gratitude and you
might say well my life is so horrible do
I have to be grateful for and I would
say that's
that's for better worse that's still a
form of
blindness right I mean people can have
very very difficult situations can be in
very very difficult situations and it's
in those difficult situations where the
search for gratitude becomes something
that is by necessity deeper and more
difficult but that doesn't mean it's not
appropriate you know and there is there
is a very tight association between
loving your enemy and being
grateful in spite of the terrible things
that occur in your life I've been
writing about the Book of Job and job is
a story of unjust suffering
fundamentally God deems job a good man
so we have it on God's word that job is
actually a good man and then all hell
breaks loose partly because God makes a
bet with Satan which is you know a hell
of a thing to do and says do your worst
he's not going to turn on me no matter
what you do and so job despite his
torment he becomes very ill he loses
everything he has his friends he becomes
ill in a way that's disfiguring his
friends come around and laugh at him and
tell him that he's a bad man and that's
why all these terrible things have been
happening to him and it's brutal and job
refuses
to lose faith in himself he says look
I'm I'm not perfect I'm but as far as
men go I've done what I should do
and it I'm not being punished in some
manner that's obviously related to my
sin it's more like the random play
of tragic forces in the world I'm not
going to lose faith in myself no matter
what and I'm also not going to his wife
says shake your fist at God curse him
and die because things have gone so
badly for job she thinks that's all
that's left to him and he refuses to do
that so he maintains
Faith regardless of what's happened to
him and that's really the moral of the
story of job which is that you are
morally obligated to maintain Faith no
matter what happens to you and there's a
practical side to that so imagine that
God and Satan conspire against you
there'll be times in your life where it
feels like that's happening and then
imagine that your reaction to that is to
become bitter and resentful and hostile
well then whatever hell you're in merely
as a consequence of the Confluence of
tragic events you have opened a whole
other hell underneath it the hell of
bitterness and resentment and
ingratitude and well and that turns into
the desire for Revenge very very quickly
you think things are bad just because
they're bad you wait till you see how
bad they can become if you allow
yourself to be corrupted by your unjust
suffering right and so it's a and I I I
do think that this is the most practical
possible advice that can be given to
people which is that you are morally
required to maintain Faith to aim up and
to treat other people the way you would
want to be treated no matter what's
happened to you you know and that's a
hell of a thing to say and you know you
might say well that's impossible PE some
people have such brutal lives that
they're destined to be corrupt but I
would say that's not true like I've met
many many people particularly in my
clinical practice who had lives that
were so brutal that you couldn't even
listen to them without it like breaking
you into pieces brutal brutal childhoods
of of a depth of malevolence you can
hardly conceptualize who decided despite
that that they were going to aim up and
they were going to maintain faith in
themselves and the world and so it's
like that's on the table for people it
seems like an odd Paradox that the
people who have brought up under lives
of the most privileged uh often the ones
that have the most complaints about the
world and people who have been brought
up in deprivation a lot of the time are
able to be perfectly in gratitude seems
very strange that that that's the way
yeah well
having so one of the things I saw at the
University I saw the faculty members my
peers retreat in the face of the
advancement of the administration over
like three decades to the point where
the universities really became corrupted
and it didn't really happen at Harvard
when I was there in the 1990s although
it was starting to fray around the edges
slightly but I really watched it at the
University of Toronto in the 20 years I
was there the administration kept making
demands on us and every time they made a
demand we would fold every time 10,000
micro Retreats so then the
administrators took over the university
and then the woke types took over the
administr ation and that was that well
the reason what I saw my faculty members
do the academics that I worked with is
that this is how the corruption starts
it's like when you're an undergraduate
you write down what you think the
professor wants to hear to get the grade
and then you're a graduate student and
you you have to let's say get along with
your professors and your supervisor you
have to tell them what you think they
want to hear so that you can get your
PhD and then maybe you are on the
academic track and you're an assistant
professor there's three levels of being
a professor you're not tenured as an
assistant so you really can't say what
you think or do what you think you
should do then because you have to get
tenured and then when you're tenured
well you're not a full Professor yet and
so you don't speak then and back in the
back of your mind you have this idea
well at some point I'll have enough
security so that I'll be able to tell
the truth but that's based on this weird
idea that the courage to tell the truth
is based on
security well courage isn't based on
security that's a stupid Theory you're
not courageous if there's no risk so
your notion is you'll be
courageous when there's zero risk well
obviously that's a contradiction in
terms you're only courageous if there's
a risk and not only that by the time
you've sacrificed your word for illusory
sec security for 15 years there's
nothing left of you that's true you've
already that's gone a long time ago you
you probably look back at the former
self who was naive and thought that you
could say what you think as
just well you're bit you're cynical
about it you know that person just
didn't know how the way didn't know how
the world worked and then it's the same
thing that you pointed out the idea that
you become good because you
have material plenty that's a silly idea
why would that be the case it's like the
same as assuming that all rich people
have got taste right there poor people
who've got beautifully designed
interiors and rich people who've got gy
messes right right right right there was
yeah well then the poor people are
actually
rich absolutely uh there's a a report I
wanted to bring this to you it's so
interesting so recent report was
released by The Harvard Graduate School
of Education detailing the drivers of
anxiety for young adults aged 18 to 25
34% reported feelings of loneliness 51%
said achievement pressure negatively
impacted their mental health 58%
reported lacking meaning or purpose in
their lives in the last month 50%
reported their mental health was
negatively influenced by not knowing
what to do with my life there has been
much examination of the well-being of
teens aged 14 to 17 not much has been
known about those occupying the critical
young adult years and yet young adults
report roughly twice the rates of
anxiety and depression as teens the
young adults are not
okay yeah I believe that I saw even with
my own kids that the the mo like when I
was a
kid probably the time between 13 and 15
was the most difficult transition but I
saw that become older by the time my
kids my kids are 30 now basically by the
time my kids were young adults I could
see that that transition into adulthood
was the place where the difficulties
were starting to
mount I think perversely that the
therapeutic world has a fair bit to do
with this partly
because therapists who are
basically secular liberal
Protestants that's a good way of
thinking about them tend to
conceptualize mental health as mental as
subjective right it's like mental health
is something you carry around in your
head like you carry around your identity
that's why we have these ridiculous
ideas that you can just Define your own
identity I am whoever I say I am well
obviously you're not because other
people other people have to go along
with your game they're buddy and they're
either going to do that they're not
going to do it or they're going to do it
voluntarily or they're going to do it by
force if they're not going to do it
you're screwed if you have to use Force
that's not going to work and if you want
them to do it voluntarily then it's not
going to be all about you obviously even
no four-year-old can find someone to
play with if he always gets to pick the
game okay
so why might young adults be lost well
part of it is that they're
thinking I'm not trying to be judgmental
of a whole generation it's a it's a form
of
thought your mental health isn't
dependent on you that's not the right
way to think about
it you I don't think you can be mentally
healthy in the absence of a long-term
stable relationship so you have to be
married let's put let's let's make that
part of the precondition for successful
adaptation as a young adult you have to
be married so you have to establish a
relationship with someone that
integrates sexuality that's there for
the long run because there for the long
run is the same as
Saye there for tomorrow they're for the
next minute that's not sanity that's
impulsiveness that's aimlessness they're
the same thing if it's what if it's all
about what you want right now or more
accurately all about what something in
you wants this moment that's the
definition of immature Insanity you have
to commit so you commit to someone else
you commit to your family you commit to
your community like there are multiple
levels of identity that stretch out into
the social world and voluntarily
adopting those levels of hierarchical
responsibility gives you an identity it
gives you a purpose it protects you from
anxiety it does that in all sorts of
ways like you know you said earlier that
one of the things you do is seek for
validation and you related that to
uncomfortable experiences you had when
you were very young well
it might not be precisely that you're
seeking for validation you might be
properly investigating how you should be
embedded in a social
hierarchy at every possible level it's
like well people think their mental
health is something that they just carry
around in their head and that if they
just got the way they looked at the
world right or if other people just
played their game that all of a sudden
they'd be mentally healthy it's
like there's no difference between
thinking about yourself and being
miserable technically if you if you if
you look at you can you can
group descriptive statements about
yourself
statistically all the all the
descriptive all the descriptors that are
reflective of self-consciousness load on
negative emotion can you not think about
yourself in a positive way
probably not really
not well let's take that
apart you like doing your podcast and
you feel positive about it okay but your
podcast isn't about
you right so if you're thinking about
how you're of utility to a broad number
of people you know maybe you would take
some satisfaction in that but that isn't
exactly thinking about yourself is it
it's thinking about the relationship
you've established with other people and
it's a relationship of responsibility
why do you like your podcast you can
pursue what you're curious about but you
wouldn't have to do that publicly okay
so why do you do it
publicly for a few reasons first one
being that it keeps me accountable that
was one of the main reasons that it kept
me accountable because I knew that if I
didn't do it if I wasn't rigorous and
precise and uh aligned with what I'd
said and done previously that is an
external eye that's watching keep okay
okay so well that's very interesting so
I would also say that's not exactly
about you that's about your ability to
live to establish Harmony between what
you say and the way you act and the
expectations that an increasingly Broad
Social Community has of you as a
consequence of what you say and how you
act okay that's not about you that's
about your nesting in a social hierarchy
right and so I think I think you can and
then you might say too well maybe you're
thinking about yourself when you're
establishing an aim or a goal well not
if they're good aims or
goals because if they're good aims or
goals and and I would say what good
means technically is an aim or goal that
will play out
well in the medium to long
term across a multitude of situations
including many many people so the a
solution that iterates across
time that and that
is situation independent and that's
broadly socially inclusive is a better
aim right it's a higher aim because it
integrates more all right now you might
want to be setting up aims and you might
be pleased about how you're progressing
in relation to those aims but if those
aims aren't don't have the
characteristics that I just
described
then if the Asim have the
characteristics I just described they're
not about you and then we could also ask
what do you mean about you exactly what
you are you talking about here you know
and so we play these identity games in
the modern world that are making people
anxious and hopeless and one identity
game is I'm defined by my sexuality okay
so let's take that I'm defined by my
sexuality okay but what do you mean by
your sexuality exactly do you mean the
opportunity to engage in sex like are
you reducing sexuality as such to the
act of sex okay let's say you are so now
what you're telling me is that who you
are is who you are when you're sexually
desirous that's what you've reduced
yourself to but it's even more than that
it's the kind of sexual desire that
wants gratification right now with no
relationship whatsoever so not only have
you now reduced who you are to your
sexual desire you've reduced your sexual
desire to the minimal set of
preconditions that would satisfy it well
then the first question that might come
up there is why not just use porn it's a
lot simpler and the answer to that is
that is what people are doing well it's
no wonder that they're anxious and
Lonesome and aimless because they've
they've reduced themselves to a
short-term desire they found the easiest
possible way of gratifying that and
they've abandoned everything that would
be a much broader conceptualization of
what sexuality would be if it was
embedded properly in well how about a
relationship to start with and I'm not
just these aren't just opinions
so there are two different strategies of
reproduction broadly in the animal world
one is zero
investment fish m mosquitoes million
Offspring they all die but one right so
you can reduce reproduction in
mosquitoes basically to sex and you make
a million mosquito Offspring all you
need is one to survive problem solved
okay on the opposite end of the spectrum
literally are human beings because we
have the longest dependency period of
any animal by a large margin we have a
high investment strategy sexual
reproduction strategy so whatever sex is
for human beings
isn't you're off and that's over that's
not what it is for human beings it's
embedded in a relationship now you might
say well we could pull sexuality out of
the relationship and just indulge in it
for the pleasure okay so now let's
forget about all the other animals now
we've got two types of human being we've
got the one night stand human being
repetitive one night stands and we've
got the long-term committed relationship
human being and then we might ask okay
what are the personality characteristics
of the people in those bins so let's go
to the short-term one night stand
sequential relationship types okay who
are they Psychopathic narcissistic
mauian and sadistic all one night stand
people if they don't start out that way
they're going to end that
way right because you can't use yourself
or other people for short-term
gratification look the definition of a
psychopath is someone who uses someone
for short-term
gratification okay so it's definitional
right so and then you might say well I'm
not like that I just like sex it's like
yeah but if you practice that for five
years you're not going to become what
you practice you know
and I talked to Russell Brand about this
a little bit on and I can say this
because it was on his podcast so it's
not like this is Secret you know Russell
had what Andrew Tate promises his
followers he had Fame he was
charismatic and he had more or less
unlimited access to short-term sexual
gratification okay in combination with
you know the chemicals that make that
even more likely alcohol and cocaine
let's
say so what are the consequences well I
asked him what were the consequences you
had this he said uh despair anxiety and
hopelessness right but but not just that
because you know Russell got himself in
trouble here month and a half ago just
about took him out well it was his past
coming back to haunt him like and he had
to scroll through his psyche and see you
know well in with all these short-term
relationships these
short-term sexual gratification binges
that I indulged in did I ever cross the
line well the answer is well you're
going to have like 200 encounters like
that you're not going to cross the line
when you're drunk when you're on cocaine
you're going to cross a bunch of lines
and then it's going to come back and
haunt you and
so it's very interesting to see in our
culture back to the hopelessness and
despair that you were mentioning that's
character in young adults life it's like
well it's all about me that's the
self-esteem movement but then me becomes
it's all about what I want and then that
becomes it's all about what I want right
now then it's it's what the lowest part
of me wants right now and to hell with
everyone else it's like
okay how are you going to play that game
without being desperate you're going to
be desperate as soon as you start
playing that game and the other thing
it's even worse than that because you're
going to end up with
the Jeremy
the the the porn star problem anybody
you're not going to be very happy about
being with the people who want to play
that game with you because they're not
going to be the people that are really
going to make you feel that life is
worth living they're going to be the
people especially on the female
side women who are willing to take
advantage of themselves for short-term
sexual gratification those aren't happy
women they're usually damaged women and
if they're not damaged when they start
playing that game game they're going to
be plenty damaged by the time they're
done with it the last time that we spoke
me you talked about population Decline
and the Census Bureau just released
today predicting that the US population
will decline for the first time ever by
the year 201100 after peaking in 2080 so
their estimates showed that the US
population which is about 333 million at
the moment is expected to reach 370 by
2080 but will be back down to 366 by
2100 and even immigration can't offset
this birth rate
decline over the last two years do you
think things have got better or worse
than you anticipated from birth rate and
marriage rate standpoint I think they're
probably still getting
worse uh and I think
musk musk is one of the few people Elon
Musk is one of the in case anybody was
wondering um he's one of the few people
who who's called out the danger of you
know a one child policy or the idea that
we should decrease the population I
mean things that don't grow die but they
die for all sorts of reasons and we
could we could tie this back to Identity
you know what's my identity I could say
well it's how I feel about myself that's
that's the line that's used everywhere
now you don't get to tell me who I am I
know who I am I can I'm who I feel I am
well first of all I don't even know what
you mean by feel like what the hell what
does that mean you're your emotional
state at the moment and you can just
impose that on everybody that's your
theory is it that's the theory of a
2-year-old literally that's a very bad
Theory
well where could your identity be other
than that well one of my identities when
I taught at Harvard was Professor
obviously and that was a good identity
but you know that wasn't exactly it
wasn't something I was carrying around
in my head it was a pattern of
relationship that I had with a whole
bunch of people all my students right it
wasn't inside my head now there was a
concordance between my representation of
myself and how I was acting in the world
and that concordance was the health it
wasn't what I thought of myself you
like part of the reason that you can
take some let's call it gratification
from being a successful podcaster is
that you're actually a successful
podcast
it's not in your head it's in 1.5
million subscribers it's how many
podcasts have you done 700 okay so it's
in 700 podcasts it's not something
you're carrying around in your head do
you remember I love the 42 Rules that
created the 24 that you ended up coming
up with but there's one that you didn't
use uh if you have to choose be the one
who does things right not the one who is
seen to do things exactly absolutely I
love that rule oh yeah that's a great
rule that's a great rule yeah well the
thing is is that you can do almost
anything you want if you're willing to
take responsibility for it if you don't
want credit one of the most effective
political maneuver I've ever seen woman
who's she's so brilliant I won't tell
you who she is but she's so sharp she's
so brilliant and she told me the last
time I saw her she's had her finger in
pies for like 30 years popping up in
places you'd never expect I thought I
asked just like how the hell did you
pull this off and she said oh I decided
30 years ago that I could do whatever I
wanted if I didn't want credit and so
that's exactly what she's done and she's
had a stellar career stellar and I've
worked with other people who've done the
same thing it's very interesting it's
very interesting thing to realize you
might say well why would I want the
responsibility without the glory it's
like hey do you want the glory are you
so sure that that wouldn't just get in
your way you know there's something to
be said for anonymity and second maybe
you want the responsibility because
that's the adventure you actually get to
do the thing that someone else just
wants to take credit for well maybe
doing the thing is plenty of reward in
and of
itself with regard to
Identity you know when when I was a
professor I was also a husband and I was
also a father well those were identities
but they weren't in my head they were
embedded in the relationship I had with
my kids and that was a meaningful
relationship embedded in the
relationship I had with my wife you
can't be you know it's almost heretical
to say this in the modern world
you can't be isolated alone without
responsibility and pursuing your
hedonistic
nonsense and not be insane and miserable
those are all the same thing right and
so you know it's got to the point i'
I've said things that have made me
somewhat unpopular like it's very
difficult for people to mature until
they have a
child you find a huge part of what you
are in that relationship it makes you
responsible makes you grow up it gives
you the opportunity to Mentor someone
you have someone around who's more
important than you well that's part of
being mentally healthy it's a huge part
of it this is this Enterprise that I put
together in London helped put together
Alliance for responsible citizenship
we're trying to put forward a model of
governance it's called subsidiary model
and the idea is that
people have multiple social roles that
scale know there's you should take care
of yourself integrate yourself which
means you can conduct yourself properly
across the medium to long run you're
self- sustaining then you can maybe
extend that to your partner and then to
your family and then to your local
community and then to broader
communities as you become more and more
competent and able to take on that
responsibility that's the alternative to
isolated Hedon slavery you slave to your
own whims and it's the alternative to
tyranny because if you take on all that
responsibility you don't have any need
for someone to govern you and so that's
another example of
how I blamed it on the therapists a
little bit I called them liberal
Protestant
secularists and that's
because they think about the Locust of
the psyche as in
interior subjective that's what a
liberal would do it's just not accurate
that isn't that isn't the way the psyche
works it's not in your head you know
it's it's in your head and in the world
at the same time it's truly the case
that your sanity is the
concordance between you as an individual
and the world that's the sanity it's not
the proper structuring of your psyche or
your brain for that matter inside your
skull you're distributed out into the
world and you should be and that's you
want to be that's where the adventure is
you want to be
solipsistic the solipsistic porn
masturbator Jesus it's no wonder you be
aimless and miserable well God it's so
pathetic why am I so unhappy it's
because you think about yourself no you
think about the lowest impulses in
yourself all the time that's why you're
miserable whilst being Arc what I
thought was particularly interesting was
your live event that you guys did at the
O2 on the evening time and everyone was
great but Douglas I thought was just a
tour to force that evening what have you
learned since being friends with Douglas
how's he impacted you or influenced
you well douglas douglas is very very
disagreeable you know and he enjoyed
combat and that isn't something that
really characterizes I don't enjoy
combat at all I mean part of the reason
that it's perverse I suppose in some
ways part of the reason that I will
engage
in difficult conversations is because I
don't want to have them
forever and so you know one of the rules
I had in my marriage and it was a rule
that my wife also was pleased to follow
was that if we have a problem we're
going to deal with it right now and
we're going to deal with it right to the
bottom and that's very unpleasant but if
you do
it sometimes you only have to do it once
and the problem goes away and then you
don't have that Bloody problem every day
for the rest of your life and sometimes
it takes you know 20 times before it's
fixed before you've got to the bottom of
things and that can be very
unpleasant Douglas is very very good at
not letting people off the hook he's
very tough and he's very good at
defending himself
and and he there's a pitilessness about
him that's extraordinarily admirable
it's a judicious pitilessness you know
and it's a dangerous game to play
because there's another gospel
realization let's say is the standards
you judge other people by will be the
standards that you yourself are judging
judged by and the reason for that is
well how are you going to judge everyone
else and not apply the same standards to
yourself like that's not going to happen
because you become what you practice and
you'll turn the eye the Hostile eye that
you turn on others you will absolutely
turn on yourself there's there's no way
around that and so Douglas plays a
dangerous game because he's very
combative but he's also extremely
careful he's very careful with his words
and we've had a he toured with through
Europe I think we did nine shows
together we we split the Q&amp;A he intro he
did a little bit of an introduction
before my lectures I really liked it I
thought it was great it's been a
privilege to get to know him super sharp
um very cultured person um very witty so
he has a great sense of humor which is
also fun which also was one of the
things that makes him a very dangerous
opponent in a debate because not only
does he have the facts at hand
like Bjorn lomberg but he's
devastatingly witting witty and cutting
and it's fun to watch that he's a master
at it so it was uh it's interesting to
think about the fact
that all you need really in a live
debate I think I learned this from you
and Sam ages ago if you're doing a live
debate now that's not a proper
intellectual formatted opening remarks
so on and so forth if you manage to get
sort of two or three real zingers you
won regardless of the content if you do
two or three real Zinger whole crowd
laughs guess what you you got yeah well
the great public intellectuals have a
vicious sense of humor right and I mean
I also think that's why so many of the
successful podcasters have been
comedians well at the ark conference I
think Constantine Ken's speech was the
overwhelming hit of the convention I
think it's got 600,000 views as of today
650 on the ark side in about 600 on his
own channel and Constantine did a
beautiful job of merging intellectual
content with wh well the thing the
interesting thing about uh my live tour
that I'm about to start doing bunch of
my comedian friends have said to me dude
I am so jealous of the tour that you get
to do because no one's expecting you to
be funny if you managed to be funny four
times in 90 minutes you've killed if I'm
not funny once every seven seconds I'm a
[ __ ] comedian right so the bar is set
and obviously coming in with
Constantine's background of Comedy means
that he is able to be by far the you
know Far and Away way funnier than most
public speakers uh but doesn't get held
necessarily to the same standards that
he he's not expecting to be one liners
all the time one of the things that
Douglas brought up when you guys were
talking on stage that I thought was
particularly interesting was The Perils
of smart people getting captured by
culture wars [ __ ] do you ever
think about how much time over the last
decade some of the smartest people on
the planet have had their attention
their cognitive horow just yeah taken
away arguing about whether men are men
and women are women or not or whatever
the idea the jure of the day is yeah
well this is so I've been partnering
with the daily wire for about a year and
a half so far that's been very
successful they've been a pleasure to
work with but what they wrestle with
constantly all them all of the
principles all of the principles at
Daily wire would rather in some real way
be be concentrating on philosophical
theological or dramatic matters so which
is partly why the daily wire is turning
towards entertainment for kids but also
for adults starting to make movies for
example and TV shows they'd rather be
doing that I had Ben
Shapiro um he participated in this
seminar on Exodus that I produced with
about nine other um extraordinarily
interesting thinkers and Ben is Shawn
you know he he's he's
wasted is he wasted on the
political the political is necessary but
it's it's one nation under God for a
reason because the political the
political isn't the Pinnacle never it's
never the Pinnacle and if you're capable
of discourse at the Pinnacle political
discourse is secondary there's also
evanescent right there's ways that it
can tumble as well there's uh how would
you say degrees of depth of political
stuff too because what works on YouTube
a lot of the time is in reacts to insane
woke Tik toks or does whatever and it's
easy to get pigeon H holded that way
yeah yeah and it is is it a
waste it's nonoptimal but it's a
question it's an interesting question to
be asked right about how much sort of
ankle or skirt need you need to show
from an algorithmic perspective in order
to keep the numbers churning because
ultimately you're producing what people
click on you don't want to be completely
beholden to your audience that's
audience capture but you also don't want
to be so unaware of having your finger
on the pulse of what is trendy that you
become obscure and obsolete right right
well in that well in that line that
you're trying to walk when you're
dealing with matters that are the
highest and also making them publicly
accessible that's a very very tight line
to walk I mean Jonathan Paso has done a
good job of that although his Market is
still relatively Niche and he certainly
is more esoteric let's say than the
daily wire guys who tend to devolve into
the political and that devolves into the
cheap political from time to time right
the hit for hit sake or the or the
chasing the algorithm and I mean that's
the danger that all politicians have too
is that and I've seen this with lots of
political
who have developed a
Persona this is particularly true in the
United States I would say because
Americans are so sales money and I don't
say that dismissively it's really hard
to sell to Market to
communicate I I saw the Elvis movie
recently and I thought it did a
beautiful job of laying this out because
Elvis was a stellar talent but his
manager who was a real Shyer was also a
stellar Talent like Elvis wouldn't have
been who he was without his corrupt
manager and you know it's sort of a deal
with the devil but you have to give the
devil is due too and the salesman part
of American culture can easily devolve
into a kind
of
narcissistic manipulativeness that's
that's where it would go if it becomes
pathological but as you said you have to
be aware of your audience and you have
to be delivering what there's a market
for and it's very difficult to get those
things right this is a question question
that I've got about your new book coming
out next year I haven't seen any of it
and it sounds like based on what you're
reading at the moment you're trying to
Grapple with religious texts especially
the Bible we who wrestle with God is the
name of the book we who wrestle with God
yeah which is the that's what the word
Israel means Israel means we who wrestle
with God and so well it's very
interesting because it means the chosen
people are the people who wrestle with
God and you might say well who wrestles
with God and the answer to that is well
everyone wrestles with god well why
because you can't act without making
moral decisions like every every step
forward is predicated on a moral
decision and so we're all wrestling with
God is God a moral
decision God is the spirit that guides
you when you make the proper moral
decisions so I wouldn't say God is a
moral decision he's the spirit of he's
the Spirit of moral decision that's
that's actually not a bad definition
like part of what I'm trying to do with
this book is to point out that a lot of
what's happening in the biblical Corpus
is actually
definitional right
well people modern people think the
fundamental issue is do you believe in
God but that's not the fundamental issue
the fundamental issue is what do you
mean by God and so let me give you an
example of this that will make it
clearer so there's no there's a medieval
idea that that God is the sum bonum
which means the sum of all that's good
or the essence of all that's good okay
you might say well I don't believe in
that now remember this is a definition
of God right God is the sum of all
that's good okay all right so you don't
believe in that all right let's take
that
apart do you believe that some things
are better than other things well people
will say yes okay so then you believe
that there is a scale of good
okay is there something that all things
that are good share in common and the
answer that has to be yes because
otherwise you don't have a conception of
good right the word good implies that
across good things there's some Essence
okay well the definition the medieval
one medieval definition of God is the
essence of good well okay let's say you
don't believe in that okay does that
mean you don't believe in anything
that's good okay then how how do you act
then because to act means to do
something that's better than what you're
doing now right there's no action
without movement towards the the good
and well you might you might say well I
don't believe that there's a unitary
good okay you believe there's there's a
fractionated good well then what do you
do when those things oppose one another
right which would be in a conflict of
Duty what how do you refer to what do
you refer to to help you adjudicate
between different Goods well generally
what you do is if you could pursue a
which is good or B which is good and
they conflict then you pick the higher
good okay do you believe in a higher
good well if you don't you can't decide
between goods which means you're
paralyzed if you do believe in the
higher good then do you believe in the
highest good well the highest good is
God what do you mean by that by
definition okay so now you have a
definition now then the next question
might be well what's your relation ship
with the highest good and you might say
well I don't have a relationship it's
like well actually you do because you
act in relationship to it you can't help
it you one of the interesting things
about the biblical Corpus is that it's
based on the insistance that you have a
relationship with being and becoming a
relationship like a personal
relationship when you say biblical culus
do you mean the collection of texts that
makes up the Bible yeah because it's a
library of of books essentially right
the Bible is actually the first library
of books it's written by a v a very
large number of different people and
aggregated over thousands of years and
then
sequenced actually sequenced into a
narrative interestingly enough because
no one really sequenced it or by no one
I mean no individual person it was the
Endeavor of the collective or the spirit
that possessed the collective over
thousands of years but the narrative is
coherent which is really quite something
and so the narrative is an investigation
number one into the nature of God number
two into the nature of relationship with
God and then number three into the
nature of the proper relationship with
God all of those things and God
is the sum of all that's good so the
Bible is an analysis of H the human
relationship with the
good what what would have to happen
after the publishing of we who wrestle
with God for you to look back on that
publication and consider it a success
what is it that you want to happen what
do you want people to feel or to take
away from that
work I think we're at the beginning of
the counter
Enlightenment the the propositions the
enlightenment view of man is wrong and
this you know out of the Enlightenment
view came science but the Science Now
indicates that the enlightenment view of
man is wrong what do you mean well the
enlightenment types believe that we
could Orient ourselves in the world
let's say empirically that and this is
Sam Harris's
proposition you can abide by the facts
you can Orient yourself as a consequence
of the dispassionate analysis of the
facts you can't and I would say the
artificial intelligence Engineers have
figured that out the postmodern literary
critics have figured that out the
psychologists and physiologists of
perception have figured it out and the
neuroscientists have figured that out so
it's not just the evidence that that
view is necessarily incorrect is
overwhelming and
multi-dimensional you can't Orient
Yourself by the facts why because there
are as many facts as there are things in
fact if you combine
things the nature of the combination is
also a fact so there's as many facts as
there are things and combinations of
things well you can't Orient Yourself by
that that's you drown in chaos it's like
you're standing in the desert and
there's an infinite number of directions
you could go well how do you choose a
direction and that's showing up in that
most recent survey that I just mentioned
people feeling meaninglessness
purposelessness I overwhel lost in the
desert they're lost in the desert that's
and the desert is the desert of fact
it's dead facts especially given how few
people can agree on is this a fact or is
this counter the well that's also a
problem is it's not like the facts are
necessarily self-evident some facts are
and I suppose to some degree what the
scientific Corpus is is the elaboration
of a set of
incontrovertible facts I've read
recently that the whole big bang
narrative is starting to come apart you
know that was a fact for a long time now
I don't know if that's the case I don't
know enough about it but my sense is
that the new discoveries from the web
telescope have made many of the
presumptions upon which the Big Bang
model was based questionable so now I
don't want to you know fall down a
postmodern rabbit hole
because alth the issue of what
constitutes a fact is a very complicated
issue anyways you can cut to the chase
by pointing out that we organize facts
in a hierarchy of value and you see the
thing about I'm trying to make this case
in the
book you do this when you look at the
world you can't look at the world except
through a hierarchy of value so for
example as we're sitting here there's an
infinite number of places we could be
pointing our eyes like I could be
talking to you and looking at this
little spot on the concrete floor or the
spot beside it or the infinite number of
spots surrounding it constantly but I'm
not I'm looking at your eyes okay why
because I'm prioritizing them so the
fact that dominates in this landscape is
the fact of your eyes
why I can use your eyes to evaluate our
shared Focus right and that's why we
look at other people's eyes it's also
why humans have got white around the
exactly it's so that we can see what
other people are attending to so that we
can get insight into the story a story
is a
description of a hierarchy of value
stories can be Fantastical though right
if they're untethered to anything I can
make up Harry Potter's a story now this
if they're untethered to anything you
won't find them interesting because they
won't resonate they they won't grip you
yeah they're they're tethered stories
are are Tethered to reality in a very
very complicated way because reality
isn't what presents itself moment to
moment
it's our
math there's a huge debate among
philosophers about mathematical
abstractions are they real well you
could make a case that a mathematical
abstraction is more real than the thing
from which it's abstracted how would you
make that case if you're a master of
mathematics you master the world so are
the mathematical abstractions more or
less real narrative abstractions are
abstractions but you could
say this is what an archetype is an
archetype is a narrative abstraction
that's more real than the world than the
apparent world it's behind the scenes
and the biblical Corpus is a is a
narrative narrative it's a hyperreal
narrative that's the right way to think
about it it's more real than real it's
more real than reality how could
something that isn't the thing be more
real than the thing well that's exactly
the problem with
abstraction right is the idea of a
church more real than a given
Church well it is in some ways because
it encapsulates what's similar across
all churches right so it it's like a
platonic ideal a category is like a
platonic ideal is it more or less real
well you could say that the reality this
is what Plato said the reality is a dim
shadow of the essence the reality is
less real than the
ideal and we we
certainly and that's actually in some
ways built into our perception like we
we
criticize we criticize the things that
present themselves to us because they
are poor reflections of the hypothetical
ideal you might say well the ideal isn't
real it's like
well you could make the opposite
argument which is that the ideal is more
real than the thing itself and I mean I
can give you an example of these
patterns so in the story of Cain and
Abel you have two patterns of
sacrifice okay why is sacrifice an issue
the reason it's an issue is because
people exist in a sacrificial
relationship to the world what does that
mean it seems to mean something like
human beings are aware of their extended
self you know you're going to be around
tomorrow and next week and next month
and next year and 5 years from now and
10 years from now now it's less certain
as you go out but you do have the sense
of yourself as something that stretches
across the decades okay and so what that
means is that you have to conduct
yourself in a manner that isn't merely
immediate you have to conduct yourself
in a manner that will work across time
now how do people do that they work
work is a sacrificial gesture so you
work by definition virtually work is the
sacrifice of the present for the future
I mean maybe someone can come up with a
better definition of work than that but
I don't think so it's like you you put
in time and effort right now it's
something even if it's something maybe
not what you'd like to be doing at the
moment you put in time and effort
because you believe what the hell does
that mean you believe it'll pay off
well is that a
contract with the future is it a
covenant because the relationship that
the biblical
Corpus insists characterizes human
striving is covenantal it's a bargain
the bargain is you make the right
sacrifices and they pay off that's the
bargain now you might say well that's
just part of the social contract but the
biblical Corpus insists that it's deeper
than that it's built into the the
structure of reality itself and that if
you got the sacrifices right the future
would be
paradisal I've got it in my head that KL
young quote beware of unearned
wisdom that feels like that feels like
it plays a role here like
how the work that you need to put in in
order to be able to arrive at genuinely
knowing the thing the difference between
actually being attractive because who
you are is attractive and you being able
to be a pickup artist that is able to
make the mouth noises and the hand
gestures that caus those those are the
fruits of false sacrifice you could say
that unearned unearned moral reputation
is the consequence of false sacrifice
well this is performative empathy right
sure
exactly definitely that's the same as
praying in public look at how good I am
if the look at if the look at comes
before the how good I am right right
right right it really
re's havoc on the good claim it's also I
spoke to Douglas about this it seems to
almost be a predictor it's an identifier
that you should be a little bit more
cautious about what this person is do
definitely you know if every single
person that's super sweety and nicey
nicy lizo do you see lizo was in the
news recently no so she is a uh artist
singer uh she the one that that got in
trouble for abusing her close
compatriots dancers she made her dancers
eat bananas out of the vaginas of amster
Damian strippers um Douglas said that he
oh yeah that's a little on the
hedonistic power mad side well she was
supposed to be you know this bass like
for the girls and body positivity and
all this stuff but it turned out behind
the scenes that she was treating her
dances terribly body shaming them all of
the time but she was the one up front
that was the Vanguard of this particular
movement but you'd seen the same with uh
was it Jimmy Fallon I think he was uh
caught up in a fural recently that he
was a tyrant to work for and yet out
front Ellen degenerous again the same
it's almost actually like if somebody is
it's very much like that overloading on
the sweetie nicey I am here for the
underlings that you go I'm a little bit
suspicious of what's going on
there if you need to Proclaim your
Purity and your good
standing if it's all words and opinions
and not Deeds one of The Commandments
one of the Ten Commandments is do not
use God's name in vain okay now people
think that means don't swear and it sort
of means that that's one of its like
tangential meanings but what it really
means is do not
claim Divine motivation for self-serving
Behavior right and that's performative
compassion so what you do is you elevate
compassion to the highest place so you
make it your God which is big mistake
because whatever God is
he is not merely compassion you elevate
compassion to the highest place and then
you say I feel sorry for people and what
that does is elevate your moral status
to the highest possible place right it's
completely unearned
because this is something JK Rowling got
so accurate with her Dolores Umbridge
character right he was an absolute power
mink with little kittens had the kittens
on the plates it's like this toxic
sentimentality I'm so nice it's like
yeah I'd like to stay away from you and
you're devouring niceness and the
freudians knew about that very very in a
very sophisticated way very early
because the devouring mother the edle
mother is the shadow side of compassion
I've been trying to come up with the
term for this for a while I like Ming
things into existence giving them names
useful uh and at the moment the best one
I've got is the the shallow Pond of
empathy which is at the moment
something which appeases people and does
not cause them any discomfort
immediately is always prioritized even
if the net effect of that over the
longterm results in their suffering
absolutely that's exactly what that's
exactly what the edle situation is it's
the prioritization of short-term
emotional Comfort over medium to
long-term thriving right cuz the mother
who kicks the child out of the nest says
this is going to hurt now
but the iterating consequences are
positive Michelangelo's PA right exactly
that's right that's right and it's
that's exactly right and the and the
moral of that story is is that if you
give up your children to the world you
will keep them right that's the
sacrifice of Abraham is Abraham is
called upon by God to sacrifice his son
and he says yes so he doesn't have to
right you have to offer up your children
to be broken by the world or or you lose
them you undermine them you destroy them
it's very it's a very paradoxical truth
we were talking about
patterns Cain is the pattern of
inappropriate sacrifice he does
everything second rate he lies he omits
he prevaricates he pretends he doesn't
offer his best ables the opposite he
offers his best which means he's comp
his light is shining on the hill right
there's no hiding he's giving it
everything he's got the Covenant with
God is that if you give it everything
you've got you will prevail and that's
what God tells Cain which to go through
some of the threads from today Instinct
staying true to that instinct honesty
saying what you mean not prioritizing
avoiding uh someone else's or your
discomfort in the short term in order to
believe that this is something which is
going to make you feel better over the
long term I have a well that's a kind of
sacrifice right there is that you're
willing to sacrifice your
shortterm physiological and
psychological comfort for a medium to
long-term benefit it's the essence of
sacrifice to offer the this is this is
something the atheists don't understand
about the biblical narrative is that the
narrative insists that we live in a
sacrificial relationship it's the
essence of humanity to live in a
sacrificial relationship it's like well
is that true or not
well as you m
sure your relationships are more
sacrificial it's less about what you in
your narrow sense want right now and
it's more about what's good over the
medium to long run including other
people well that's a sacrificial
relationship now the Covenant you know
and this is a matter of Faith it's the
matter of the deepest
Faith do you are you willing to act out
the proposition that the way to make the
world reveal itself to you in its most
positive guise is for you to adopt the
most appropriate sacrificial
relationship well it's a big risk isn't
it because you have to give up
everything that's the that's the deal
you give up everything that's low
everything everything well that's what
the Christian passion is because the
Christian passion is an archetypal story
because Christ is the person who
sacrifices
everything thoroughly
100% And the biblical notion is that
there's no difference between that and
the Descent of the god of the Old
Testament
into into into the space of human
reality so God is elaborated as a spirit
in the Old Testament that's way of
thinking about it fleshed out right into
the law and the prophets and Christ
presents himself as the embodiment of
that so imagine here's a way of thinking
about it
you can invite various spirits to
possess you that's what you do when you
give way to Rage that's what you do when
you give way to lust let's say you allow
spirits to possess you well what would
you be like if you did nothing but allow
the highest of spirits to possess you
well that's the question that's put
forth in the New Testament and part of
the answer to that is
if you allowed the highest of all
possible spirits to possess you you
would be able to confront everything
that life could possibly throw at you
and that's what happens in the Christian
passion because the worst that life can
throw at you is the worst tragedy and
the worst tragedy is the worst death the
worst and most painful death inflicted
on the least deserving person right
that's the ultimate reach of tragedy
okay that's not enough Christ has to
confront that and and he has to confront
malevolence that's the harrowing of hell
so the idea is that to adapt fully to
life you have to allow yourself to be
possessed by the spirit that will enable
you to voluntarily face unjust suffering
and death and evil it's like well you
got an argument against that how could
it be any other way one of the things
that I think I see people respond to
this degree of pressure when they think
about what is going happen long term uh
I have discomfort that is in front of me
now that I need to face that I need to
go through if I'm going to get to
Something in the future that I think
that I'm supposed to do and one of the
solutions that they come up with which
isn't a solution but it kind of is to
them is I'm not going to do anything
yeah you know that uh no decision is
kind of the same as a neutral a neutral
Choice one of my friends Alex has got
this quote which I love and he says the
heaviest things in life aren't iron and
gold but unmade decisions the reason you
are stressed is that you have decisions
to make and you're not making them yeah
yeah that's yeah yeah no doubt about it
well there's no
indecision right there's
only because you
age like you pay for your you pay for
your indecision it's a decision it's a
decision to avoid
fundamentally no and part of the
moral that's embedded in the story of
Job And in the Christian passion is that
you can Master what you'll
face and maybe that's true maybe that's
true I mean the clinical literature
seems to indicate that it's true because
one of the things you do if you're
a competent
clinician is you look at what people are
attempting to accomplish and and maybe
that needs some retooling but let's
assume that they have a goal in mind
that would work right you've talked it
through with them strategically they
have a well-laid out Vision okay now
they're laying out the vision and they
encounter impediments that stop them and
maybe they're impediments that make them
afraid and paralyze them and so then
what you do is
you decompose the impediment just as we
talked about earlier until you find a
way they can
advance that constitutes a genuine
advance that they'll actually do so what
you do is you take the problem and you
narrow it until they'll face it okay
then they face it then what happens they
get more competent that's what happens
and then they get better at facing all
problems so they don't just learn how to
deal with that specific problem they
learn a lesson that generalizes across
problems they get braver when you do
when you use exposure therapy people
don't get less afraid they get braver
that's way better cuz braver braver
moves from situation to situation okay
so the question is here here's the
question if you faced everything that
was put in front of you who would you be
well the answer the biblical answer is
you'd be a true Son of God that's the
biblical answer it's like well do you
believe that well it depends on what you
mean by
believe do you think that you do you
have a better bet than facing what's
there well you just have to be sensible
about it for a moment it's like is your
theory that you're going to adapt better
using falsehood and
avoidance because that's the contrary
Theory you either face
it and you do that predicated on the
faith that something in you will respond
if you do or you don't face it those
that's it those are the options if you
don't face it that's Faith too that's
faith in the notion that avoidance and
deception will
suffice I think that for a lot of people
it's it's born out of fear it's born out
of being a people pleaser yeah and not
wanting to hurt other people around you
and not wanting to tell them things that
they don't want to hear or not doing or
saying things that you know are going to
upset the people that are around you
right but in the short term again yeah
in the short term again you know if if
you look at a good mother a good mother
upsets her kids a lot quit doing that
why well why why not just let your
children do exactly what they want when
they answer to that is well first of all
it terrifies them because kids actually
want they want walls they don't want to
be in the desert doing anything they
want they want a wall space in which
they have the optimal amount of Freedom
so a person who truly loves someone else
doesn't strive at all cost never to
upset them that's that's the devouring
mother if if you love someone well
that's the biblical quote you chastise
them well what does it mean it's like
look if you love someone and they're
doing something stupid and
self-destructive and you can see it it's
incumbent on you to say you know this is
going to upset you but as far as I can
tell you're doing something stupid and
self-destructive and then there's going
to be a tussle about that because
they're going to say well who are you to
judge and that's a perfectly good
question is what makes you think you're
right and here's the reasons I'm doing
this and you know these are the Terrible
experien that I've had that have led me
to take this path and sometimes that can
be really compelling you know you meet
people who are bitter and resentful and
then they tell you about their life and
you think well yeah
but but then you meet people who've had
just as terrible a life who aren't
bitter and resentful right and they're
doing better and so even if it seems
justifiable maybe even if it is
justifiable it's not justifiable one of
the most common situations I think that
this people pleasing tendency would show
up is someone who maybe thinks that they
should break up with a relationship but
doesn't do it and sticks about in order
to protect their partner and I found a
thread on Reddit that was five questions
to ask yourself if you're unsure about
your
relationship if someone told you you're
a lot like your partner would this be a
compliment to you are you truly
fulfilled or just less lonely are you
able to be unapologetically yourself or
do you feel the need to show up
differently to police is your partner
are you in love with who your partner is
right now as a whole or are you only in
love with their good side their
potential or the idea of them and would
you want your future or imagined child
to date someone like your partner and
this thread was just filled with people
having existential crisis and it seemed
to me to
be a collection of people who had
managed to believe that continuing to
Manana Manana the short-term MH
postponement of the discomfort of the
decision that they wanted to have around
their partner uh was somehow the noble
thing to do or the good thing to do or
The Virtuous thing to do or the thing
that ultimately would result in the best
outcome even though they knew that if
they spread it out long enough and then
it's just hidden we just shov under the
rug so yeah that uh list of five
questions I think uh well in most
relationships you can break up or you
can have a thousand
fights you know and if you have a
thousand fights then you don't have to
fight
you make peace that way you know because
you're different than your partner so
there's things to work out there and you
might think about that as a compromise
but it's not it's
that you're different than your partner
and you have to find a game that you
both want to play that's not a
compromise that's a solution it's like
you bring your skills to the table and I
bring my skills to the table and then we
figure out some game we can play where
we're both optimally utilized and it's a
better game than we can play alone
that's not a compromise
well but getting to that very difficult
and people bring all sorts of baggage to
a relationship and you have to it's just
like disciplining children really it's
the same thing your children are you
note your children are annoying you you
can note that oh there I'm being annoyed
by my child okay so what questions do
you ask am I a tyrannical son of a [ __ ]
who's touchy well that's why you need
your wife cuz you can go ask her my kids
are annoying me am I a tyrannical son of
a [ __ ] who's touchy and she said said
yeah you probably need something to eat
or you're a bit of a prick that way and
you got to listen because maybe it's you
or maybe she says yeah that goddamn
child's been getting on my case too and
then you ask each other are we mutually
tyrants it's like no that kid's annoying
okay do we want him to be
annoying well if you love your child
then the answer to that would be no
because if he's annoying you he's going
to annoy other people he's going to
annoy his potential friends he's going
to annoy other adults he's going to go
through the world being annoying and
everyone's going to frown at him that's
not helpful so then you could just fix
it and you're that's going to cause some
short-term upset you know you're maybe
you have a like a 13-month-old child
who's very extroverted and disagreeable
who like rules the roost and every time
the mother goes more than a foot away
from her she has a squawk fit because
she's learned to control maybe the
mother you know was still tied up with
infant care and can't put down a
boundary and so now you have to do
something about this emerging monster of
a 14-month-old child and one of the
things you do is every time the child is
bossy first of all you note it and you
note that you're not very fond of
yourself for being tyrannized by a
14-month-old that's a bit of a status
hit like it should be so you have to
notice I'm annoyed by this child then I
should do something about it well it's
going to cause short-term emotional
distress the same thing UR when you're
dealing with your partner it's like
you're annoying me okay now maybe that's
me so I should bloody well maybe we
should have a talk about that you're
annoying me convince me that it's me and
I should listen because maybe it's me
and if I'm annoyed about you and I
shouldn't be I should fix that but maybe
it's you so let's find out exactly
what's going on you know and that'll
usually man that's that'll there's just
constant thrust and counter thrust in
the discuss discussion like that and
usually you know the conversation will
circle around whatever the hell the
issue is till you get to the bottom of
it and God only knows where that is but
then maybe you can sort it out you know
and if you sort out enough of those
things you live in peace and that's
something worth attaining you know and
I've thought forever in my marriage
there's nothing there's nothing too
small to fight about now you know I put
in some rules that I used to have with
my clients too it's like if someone bugs
you you should note that and you
shouldn't do anything about it probably
if they bug you twice the same way then
you think oh okay that's twice but
probably still you shouldn't do anything
about it but if they bug you three times
then you can
say here's what you just did and they'll
say well no I didn't do that and then
you say yeah you did and you did exactly
the same thing in this other situation
and you did exactly the same thing in
this other situation so don't be telling
me you didn't do it cuz you did it three
times and I watched okay now they come
up with reasons they did it and maybe
some of them have to do with what a
stupid son of a [ __ ] you are and you
should listen because maybe they're
right but that's at least the beginnings
of the process by which you unravel the
problems you want to figure out well we
don't want to do this this isn't the way
we want to treat each other we want to
get to a place
where we want to get to a place where
our whole life is like the best moments
of the best dates we ever
had that's a good goal and that's that's
that's attainable it you got to work man
there's there's a the scene in the in
Genesis God throws Adam and Eve out of
paradise because of their pride their
sin of
Pride they each have their own
particular version of that sin Eve's sin
and Adam's but they get thrown out of
paradise anyways for pride and God puts
cherubs at the gates of paradise and the
cherubs they're kind of these monstrous
Angels terrifying figures and they hold
swords that are on fire that turn Every
Witch Way and burn and you might say
well what does that mean and it means
that well a sword is something that cuts
away right a sharp blade and a and fire
is something that burns and a sword that
Burns Burns and cuts away and a sword
that burns and
turns every which way is a burning sword
from which nothing can
escape okay now you want to walk into
Paradise everything that isn't worthy in
you has to be burned and cut away right
well that's what that conflict is in a
relationship you know it's like that's
not suitable for Paradise what does it
have to do it has to be cast into the
outer Darkness where there will will be
nashing of teeth right it has to be cut
away and destroyed and everything that
isn't worthy has to go well the
Michelangelo effect is all about you and
your partner becoming the idealized
version of each other right you are
going to do for me the things that I
want within your parameters of control
that you want to be the best partner for
me and I want to do the same for you and
we're both going to communicate to each
other and we're going to stand our
ground where we have boundaries and
we're going to Contin to compromise
that's what love should do that's what
love should do like if you love
someone if it's genuine love you
see you see their hidden Soul that's a
good way of thinking about it you get a
glimpse of the light that they could
reveal to the world if they revealed it
that's what you see and then to act in
love is to encourage that to come
forward and to discourage anything that
gets in its way that's why I love the
the Michelangelo effect heard of and I'd
been using it okay so why the
Michelangelo effect this is why
Michelangelo sees this huge massive UNH
block I see I see and inside of that he
is able to see davidh and over time
slowly he will chip away and he will
chip away and he will chip away so you
see something that isn't there that's
inside of the thing which is rough and
UNH and uncivilized and undomesticated
and rambunctious and and sometimes
terrible and you were able to from that
Al that's actually part of the daing the
uncarved block so a child is an uncarved
Block in in in the dowst view and and
you remove everything that's excess
until what's perfect remains right and
that's see the the logos in the Old and
New Testament the logos that creates the
world is the judging faculty
that what would you say that separates
the wheat from the
chaff right and it's not it's compassion
in a sense because if you're
compassionate towards someone you want
what's best for them all things
considered but that compassion in the
highest sense can't exist without
judgment because the judgment is this
part of you isn't worthy to continue and
certainly that's what you're doing with
your children when you see them
misbehaving you think no that's no not
that not that something more
sophisticated even with my little
granddaughter the other day she's very
very playful and she's a very nice
little girl she's very playful and very
fun and funny and not neurotic and so
she's a pleasure to be around but she
hasn't seen me for a while and so she
was poking me getting me to chase her
around and poking me and she'd come up
and give me a whack you know and at one
point she whacked me too hard and she
knew it and I said that's not fun that's
not acceptable and then she stopped but
she was playing with that edge trying to
find out where fun is and you know can
how hard can I hit Grandpa she doesn't
bloody well know she kind of knows but
she needs to know exactly well I can't
let her get away with it because then
she's not fun to play with she has to
learn to come and give her Grandpa a
whack and exactly the way that elicits a
playful response and that isn't annoying
and so there's a very you know you might
think well it's pretty harsh judgment to
lay on a 5-year-old it's like no it's
not I would like her to be the most fun
kid to play with that she could be right
and so I'm not going to pretend that
it's okay when it's not not setting that
boundary is almost like a curse it is a
curse yeah there you go away we would
because then how's she going to play
with other with other kids if she
doesn't know the they're not going to be
as forgiving as Grandpa definitely not
yeah we were talking before we got
started I had this conversation with
Robert spolski and it it was really
really profound I mean I know that he's
a brilliant guy and this new book of his
is about sort of Free Will and
determinism which has got an upper bound
on how interesting that is for me but he
gave this quotee to Andrew hubman where
he said dopamine is not about the
pursuit of happiness it is about the
happiness of pursuit right that's
definitely right and I I haven't been
able to stop seeing this everywhere so
uh Morgan housel um a friend told me
this great story uh he is an investor
he's got a fund he's an author he's got
a family he's got all of these things
they plan to go away in holiday and
they've been planning it for a long time
and with the kids and the wife and him
and all of his businesses it was a
arduous thing to go through to get
themselves out there and finally they
get there after the journey and the
plane and the children and the crying
and all the rest of it and he walks out
on the balcony on the first night of
this holiday that they've planned for
forever and his first thought to himself
was wouldn't it be great if we came back
here next year it would be so great if
we could come back here next year so
literally during the supposed enjoyment
of the destination he was already
thinking about the journey and you know
it's not the journey it's not the
destination it's the journey is kind of
TR but it it puts a new perspective on
it there is no destination each
destination is simply the beginning of
the next journey and I haven't not been
I haven't not been able to see it I see
it I see it everywhere I see it
everywhere in my own life well there's
there's technically two different forms
of reward there's consumatory reward and
so that's the reward that's what an
orgasm is it's consumatory reward it's
it it brings the behavioral and
perceptual sequence to a halt it ends it
right at the climax it ends it but then
it's over that journey is over right
then there's the dopaminergic reward
that spolski was talking about and
dopaminergic reward is evidence of
advancement towards a goal right okay so
so there's a corollary to
that well how do you become optimally
engaged because dopamine facilitates
engagement and focus which is why drugs
like amphetamines can be used for kids
who
are attention deficit disordered you T
tap up the dopamine response they lock
on right okay so they're locking on to a
goal directed Pursuit the problem with
amphetamines is that they can lock you
on so hard you can't get out of the
frame so like kids on amphetamines will
obsess for example about cleaning up
their closet they can't switch to the
next activity okay dopaminergic reward
is reward that's accured in relation
ship to a goal okay so what what's an
implication of that well pursue the
highest possible goal well why because
the kick from advancement is higher now
you have to balance that it can't be you
have to advance right because imagine
the rewards got two components number
one is you're moving towards something
valuable okay so you want it to be as
valuable as possible okay but you have
to be moving so it can't be so valuable
that it's out of your reach to the Moon
I'm not going to be able to see every
single increment that I make yes you
want to get to the moon that's right you
can't walk there so it's a bad plan you
need something extremely valuable that
you can move towards okay so part of the
reason that you establish a relationship
with God let's say is because that's
what sets the upper bound to your vision
it's like I want things to be the best
they could be that's a vision of
paradise well that has to be
fractionated into you know your proximal
decisions but lurking behind that should
be this continual movement towards what
would you say a heaven that Reeds as you
approach it that's a proper vision of
Heaven A Heaven is a place that's
perfect and getting
better both at the same time that's what
music shows you because a great piece of
music is perfect but it's just getting
better as it unfolds and and you need
that this is part of the problem with a
static utopian Vision something dovi
criticized
if you gave people Nothing But
consumatory reward he famously says so
that they can do nothing but sit in tubs
of hot water eat cake and busy
themselves with the with the
continuation of the species human beings
would break that all to Hell in a moment
just so they have something interesting
to do what was that quote that you said
on Rogan years
ago if we were to make the world
sufficiently perfect the only desired
lack would be for the desire of lack
itself what's that kard what's the
what's the proper can you remember the
prop well kirkgard pointed out that if
we if as we make the world easier and
easier so this is perhaps part of the
problem with the material plenty that's
at hand is that at some point what
becomes lacking is lack itself yes right
yes exactly exactly it's optimal
deprivation you know and if everything
is delivered to you on a platter it's
like what the hell are you even doing
there this happens in the the story of
Abraham so Abraham who's the father of
Nations right so Abraham gets it right
he has everything at the beginning of
the story he has Rich parents he has
he's he's got nothing that he has to do
he's like 70 when the story opens he's
been taken care of hand and foot his
whole life and the voice of God comes to
him and says I'm the god of your
ancestors telling you get out of your
zone of comfort get out into the world
and Abraham's pretty old by this point
but for whatever reason he decides that
he's going to forgo the comfort for the
adventure and then as Abraham progresses
he makes the requisite sacrifices each
becoming more difficult as he ascends
and he adopts this pattern of
relationship with the god that calls him
to Adventure that literally makes him
the father of Nations and so you can
even think about that biologically if
you want you might as well
people like Dawkins think reproduction
is
sex and that's why he can talk for
example about the selfish Gene making
itself manifest in sex reproduction
isn't
sex sex is a necessary but insufficient
precondition for
reproduction Abraham adopts a motive
being a sacrificial motive being that
establishes the optimal environment for
his sons who then establish the op
optimal environment for their sons and
their sons and their sons so you can
imagine that what Abraham is doing this
is what the story means is he's adopting
a mode of behavior that works best All
Things Considered across multiple
generations and he sacrifices everything
to that it's this incredibly expansive
Vision given that we're in a world which
is comfortable
and we we have created buildings in
which there are heavy things that you
pick up and put down in in the same
place because it's simply so rare that
you have to pick up heavy things
right bumps on our roads for the same
reason proliferation of ice baths and
sauner and and and and even reading to
some extent you know difficult reading
difficult
things where should people go given that
they are in a a world which is more
comfortable than ever before where
should they go to encourage them to find
difficult things truth
truth is what's optimally difficult the
truth is optimally difficult that's a
really wonderful thing to know the truth
is Adventure there's no there's no
distinction partly
because if you're going to just say what
you believe to be true you have to let
go of the consequences you can't predict
the
consequences well there's no difference
between not being able to predict the
consequences in having an adventure
they're the same thing right if you knew
the consequences it would be an
adventure it's not an adventure if if
the if the consequences are forgone the
same as it's no sacrifice or courage if
there's no risk right right right it's
exactly the same and so it's a it's a
wonderful thing to know that optimized
Adventure is to be had in the truth I
think in every given situation so Christ
says in The Sermon on the Mount that to
orient yourself properly and it's often
viewed as this hippie pay on take no
thought of the moral the moral will take
care of itself you know God takes care
of The Sparrows he'll certainly take
care of you it's like a hippie wet dream
it isn't what that isn't the that isn't
the core of the message the the core of
the message is very straightforward
Christ says aim up to the highest thing
you can possibly imagine so that's the
relationship with God you put what's at
the Pinnacle properly at the Pinnacle
and you aim at that and
then you
concentrate that and it's that and
treating other people like you would
like to be treated yourself that sets
the moral frame then you attend to the
day and the cares of the day it's like
once you've established the proper moral
frame you pay attention to the day and
you live in truth and that moves you
towards that destination you have to
have the orientation right you have to
be aiming up but then it's just a matter
of what would you say abiding by the
truth that's the logos that sets people
free and that's right doing it properly
right there was one of the other rules
that didn't make it into your book uh
nothing Well Done is insignificant right
right right right yeah well you acrew so
Christ tells his followers in the
gospels to to store up treasure in
heaven not in the places that MTH can
eat and rust can destroy well what is
that what is meant by that well it's
meant by the same it means the same
thing that you just pointed to which is
that
if you run yourself through a disciplin
disciplinary process so you accomplish
something maybe it doesn't you don't
attain the goal you were aiming at but
you acrw a new way of looking at the
world and a set of skills well if you
just keep doing that you have multiple
ways of looking at the world in more and
more skill well that's that's your
Storehouse of treasure you
know the reason women use wealth as a
proxy for attractiveness is because
wealth is a proxy for competence it's
not competence because you can be rich
and useless now it's not that easy but
it can at least happen temporarily but
women use markers of wealth to assess
competence and the competence is the
treasure not the wealth because if
you're competent you could be thrown
into the desert and you'll make it Bloom
I've said this about uh people that go
to the gym so from the outside someone
that goes to the gym and has got a good
body or whatever there the body and it
this is what you get to touch during sex
when you're into
but they is more important I think than
the way that it manifests physically
it's someone who is reliable who is able
to overcome hard things who is self
disiplined it's just this whole big long
laundry list of things that they're able
to uh deal with pain and discomfort
which is kind of sexy in a way uh well
it's the perfect it's the perfect
materialist disciplinary strategy right
because it's very concrete well you
change your body it's like is that a
spiritual Pursuit well it is in so far
as it requires you know long-term
discipline and and sacrifice and you
might hope and I think this is likely
the case that you know you can get stuck
in the bodily self-improvement Niche and
and focus on that too obsessively but
you can also use it as a stepping stone
to discipline Pursuit itself and lots of
people do that I think I told you the
last time that we chatted about Mano
pause this thing that I'd come up with
so I noticed toward the end of my 20s
that lots of guys who had been training
with a particular modality usually
bodybuilding usually exclusively for the
way that they looked realized as they
approached their 30s that they were
getting out of breath going up a set of
stairs and that they maybe couldn't
touch their toes and they looked
fantastic but I know they they just felt
like they should maybe start to Value
different things and they then changed
their training and they would go and do
Brazilian jiu-jitsu or yoga or CrossFit
or you know some other form of whatever
and that precipitated a change in
everything else and I saw this in myself
right I get toward the end of my 20s
I've achieved success in many of the
ways that Society tells a young man that
he should value success there was a
discordance something fell off and you
then think okay
well maybe I need to assess whether or
not the things that I've been told I
should want are things that I actually
want to want and very quickly you
realize and I don't know it feels like a
quarterlife crisis I think so many men
go through this they go I either
succeeded or didn't succeed at a game
that I was told that I was supposed to
Value playing and upon reflection I
really don't care for it as much as I
thought I did maybe there was some
elements I was so proud of what i' done
with my business partners I was so proud
of the things that we'd achieved but
then there was other stuff where I was
like why have I attach so much of my
sense of self worth into this and this
and this and then you start you have to
assess and M the so this is what happens
in the story of Exodus when Moses en
encounters the burning
bush so he's just going about his
business as a shepherd and he's doing
all right he's got two wives he likes
his father-in-law he's well regarded in
this new country that he's in he's left
Egypt where there's a price on his head
essentially for killing a Egyptian who
was Tor tormenting a uh one of the
Hebrews anyways Moses is just going
about his business as a Shepherd which
was a very tough job in those days and
this thing catches his eye this this
glimmer this gleam and he goes to
investigate okay so what what does that
mean it means as you're progressing
through life something will capture your
interest and in the story you just told
it's like somebody decides they're going
to start going to the gym there's
something about becoming physically fit
that calls to them right which is an
interesting thing right because it calls
to them it's not even necessarily a
decision they make it's more like a
possibility that makes itself manifest
that's of Interest so they decide to
pursue it so they look into it more
deeply well so Moses approaches the
burning bush and he gets closer and
closer right and a bush is a symbol of
life right like it's a tree a tree of
life and a tree of life that's on fire
is being that's the life the tree and
becoming that's the fire the
transformation so a burning bush is a
symbol of being and becoming as such now
it's something that beckons okay so now
you pursue your physical fitness cuz
it's called to you and you concentrate
more and more on it you get more and
more disciplined but as you get more and
more disciplined you start to transform
right and so your vision starts to
change now what happens to Moses is that
as he gets closer and closer to the
burning bush he starts to realize that
he's on sacred ground so he's going
deeper the investigation is taking him
deeper so he takes off his shoes and and
continues to approach he's still going
down the same Trail right pursuing this
thing and then the voice of God itself
speaks to him from the midst of the
burning bush and that's what turns him
into a leader and so what does the story
mean it means that as you walk through
life in your normal mode things will
call to you and if you pursue them they
will take you deep it doesn't really
matter what it is that calls what
matters is that you pursue it and you
you pursue it to the depths and as you
pursue it to the depths you will become
transformed and if you do that without
reservation that will turn you into that
will turn you into the person who frees
the slaves and opposes the tyrants and
that is how it works that's the call and
that can happen in any direction
virtually any
direction you just have to pursue it
with sufficient Faith
right one of the things that's been I
guess derogated a lot by pretty much
everybody uh at the moment is University
education
and I had such an interesting time at
University almost exclusively outside of
my education right all of the good
things that happened to me while I spent
5 years at
Newcastle didn't include what I was
taught it was never inside of the
lecture theater it was everything I was
doing outside of that and lots of my
friends it's very trendy on the internet
to mock higher education as useless
pieces of paper uh it's not you don't
need it in order to be able to be
successful it's certainly the thing that
I've ended up doing this podcast didn't
require me to go to university maybe in
some ways it did M but also from a
definitely from a qualification
perspective it didn't but I I think I'm
still relatively Pro University
experience uh and yeah you know you've
got Peterson Academy launching which is
your new thing I wondered how you
thought well basically are universities
salvageable given that so much that's
good about the university experience has
almost nothing to do with the education
side of it
H are they
salvageable some are I
imagine um
Hillsdale does great it's a conservative
College in northeastern us run by Larry
AR they have a 1% dropout rate as
opposed to the typical 50% dropout rate
and they they provide a
classical what used to be a liberal
education Arts education it's a more
conservative Enterprise given how the
Overton window has shifted but
Larry's students concentrate on physical
fitness his philosophy Department tends
to meet in the weight room which is
pretty interesting he has weight benches
scattered all around the campus about a
third of the students take music courses
so the place is very musical um it's a
very disciplined place the quality of
education is Extreme extremely high so
there are institutes that are holding to
their mandate I think that's rare and I
think overall the universities have
become irretrievably corrupt as far as I
can tell and
so
we had hoped that we could provide
something approximating an alternative
but you put your finger on one of the
complexities in doing that it's easy to
think that a university is the
transmission of Knowledge from experts
to empty vessels the students let's say
so it's lectures tests and accreditation
but that's not really what a university
is it's an apprenticeship if you're
fortunate when you go to university you
find a professor or two that you can
work with who really teach you how to
think they're usually those professors
are gen generally quite rare and you're
fortunate if you do establish a
relationship like that especially at a
big university where the student to
faculty ratio is absurdly high like 200
to one I was in lecture theaters that
were 300 to one I didn't I didn't get a
relationship like that with any of my
right right and that's that's that's
really not good because you need you
need an apprenticeship relationship to
become educated fundamentally um we
started this we're formulating Peterson
Academy we're hoping that we can provide
people with extremely high quality
lectures I'm fortunate as you are to be
able to reach out to people who are
charismatic and well educated and we
offer them a good Financial deal and we
treat them very well and they come down
to Miami and they record a relatively
short lecture series eight hours and
uh we're implementing state-of-the-art
testing procedures and we're going to be
giving out a certificate that you will
have to earn to AC ire and so we're
hoping that the quality of our graduates
will be such that the certificate will
speak to for itself as a marker for
conscientiousness and educated expertise
we'll see we're also building out the
social side of it because as you pointed
out a huge part of what happens to you
when you go to university is social and
socialization you get to make a whole
new group of friends it's a big deal
right it's a huge it's one of those
times in your life where you
can parcel off who you were and you can
become something new you remember every
single summer at least for me maybe this
is because I was chronically so
unpopular in school I would come back
every summer uh imagining that I would
be able to reinvent myself I'm going to
be the cool kid this year I'm going to
be the sporty kid this year or whatever
whatever but the big one is a 18 because
you're not even in the same town no one
even knows who you are no one even knows
what to think about who you are right
and uh that for me was the big
inflection point of me going from the
child that I was to the sort of young
adult that I was going to end up right
right well if you're fortunate you have
a number of times where that happens in
your life where you can make a
relatively clean break and you can
Invent Yourself a new right this is just
just to interject that
like there's an idea called monk mode uh
which has kind of become a bit of a meme
online but I first read about this years
ago uh and it involves uh extended
period of um isolation to work on
yourself uh to reflect on your flaws to
kind of do the inner work to introspect
um it's
usually tied in with meditation with
improving your diet with improving your
F physical fitness your mental Fitness
all of these different things and uh
that I've almost seen it as if doing
that and focusing on yourself for a
short space of time that's very very you
know it's maybe a couple of months
really really focusing on you still
going about and doing your work and
doing the rest of the things but outside
of that just really really trying to
make yourself as good as possible
periodizing that for me was one of the
most powerful inflections aside from the
lifestyle change well that's what
confession is supposed to be
fundamentally I mean when you take stock
of yourself you
confess you confess to yourself and
you make your sins a
reality you assess yourself for your
insufficiency and you Proclaim your
insufficiencies and that well then you
can start working on them it's like it's
painful here's all the things that I'm
not here's all the things that I'm not
that I would like to be right that's
painful self-examination but the
advantag is you get all your problems on
the table and the advantage to that is
that Problem by
problem there's likely some hope like
for example you said you were unpopular
when you were a teenager but that
doesn't mean that you had to carry that
forward into University right there was
a possibility that so how did you get
out of that what did you
do the main reason I think was that I
didn't really understand how to relate
to other kids so I found myself
obsessing over the way that other kids
would wear their shirts or tie their
ties or the sort of shoes that they
would wear or the right so you were
looking at external models
or why that's why they had friends and I
didn't right and I didn't realize that
it was just I
wasn't socially Adept I didn't
understand how to relate to other kids
very well and I think I just got to the
stage especially when I went to
University that I'd spent enough time
for me to have learned at least some
rough HED social skills and now finally
was able to sort of cast off some of the
uh presuppositions that uh had maybe
been following me uh because what were
the opening points for you like do you
remember the first friendship you made
in University oh yeah the guys that I
lived with so okay so these were these
were roommates yeah yeah yeah okay so
yeah that's a good op see that's a thing
that's hard to duplicate online right
because it's a having a group of
Roommates is a
formative experience it was crazy for me
I didn't know because again only child
two parents living in a small house I
didn't know that he was supposed to
knock on someone's bedroom door before
you were to go in I'd never done that
I'd spent my did 18 years I'd never had
to knock on anybody's bedroom door CU
like Mom and Dad are down like who else
is there I'm going to knock on the dogs
like the kitchen door to see if the dogs
are mind me going into the kitchen uh
and so many of those things looking back
on it now are just so ridiculous not
knowing that that was something that he
was supposed to do yeah well not knowing
those Elementary skills though that can
be a huge impediment you know I had
people in my clinical practice we spent
hours practicing how to introduce them
and to shake hands because you want to
be expert at that because if you're not
good at that at all like if you're
really bad at it you're
screwed you can't even tell someone your
name and so how are you going to make a
friend then you you you announce
yourself as incompetent with your first
move and then if you do if that happens
to you 10 times you're so terrified dis
incentiv oh God terribly terribly and so
you should become expert at that that's
something you can do with your kids is
so they can become expert at introducing
themselves you know shake hands do it
with a bit of a firm grip look at the
other person try smiling you know match
your Tempo to the other
person another Dynamic that I've been
thinking about recently I was at a
retreat in La a few months ago and one
of the guys that was there had said he'd
stopped talking and writing on the
internet because he noticed that the
story he was telling in public he began
feeling the necessity to live up to in
private and I think that whether you're
a a writer or just someone that's got
500 followers on your Instagram and a
Facebook from back in the day or
whatever there is a there is an online
Persona that people put forward that
they then almost feel is more real than
what they are and then they try and
reverse engineer themselves to fit this
new is this the problem with writing
essays that contain what your professor
wants to hear so you can't do that
without altering your soul you can't do
that you you cannot construct for
yourself a false Persona designed to
extract resources from the world without
that becoming part of you like there's
no one is that sophisticated no one can
have two selves like that it's part of
the reason why you have to be very
careful about what you say and do is
that you're
when you when you practice falsehood you
become false it's not like those are
beliefs that are just in your head you
rewire yourself so you start to
literally see the world through the
frame of your falsehoods that's a very
bad plan I've heard you say if you say
things long enough you're going to
believe them you become them it's even
worse than believing them it's deeper
than that they they're built into you as
unquestioned implicit axioms and as we
said earlier on this can go in either
direction right you can fake it until
you make it one small step at a time
moving toward a vision which you know is
positive and you continually reassess to
ensure that you're not getting hijacked
and going in the wrong direction yes or
or you generate a so look in the in the
Pinocchio movie which I've analyzed to
death in the Disney Pinocchio you're Mr
Pinocchio yeah world's leading Pinocchio
so Pinocchio exactly exactly part
Pinocchio is trying to get rid of the
strings that that that pull on him Every
Which Way that aren't under his control
and to become something genuine okay so
he has three basic
tempations one
is to
lie right so that's the
nose the another is to be an actor and
when I first came across that in the
movie I thought what the hell's going on
here one of Pinocchio's Temptations is
to be an actor now why would the
Hollywood people do that why would they
denigrate the actor and then I thought
oh it's not an actor it's a false
Persona to be the actor instead of the
real thing to be the appearance instead
of the reality to take the credit
instead of doing the work right to be
false next temptation is to be neurotic
it's so interesting especially in in in
the world that we have now how
perspicacious these animators were
Pinocchio is literally enticed onto the
island of pleasure by a false Doctor Who
diagnoses him with an illness he doesn't
have and the the story is look how sick
you are you're working too hard you need
to go to Pleasure Island well Pleasure
Island is run by
slavers right so it's
perfect
well be careful what you practice be
careful what you practice right you can
be the actor of your own ideal and
that's a way of stepping forward but
when you make false claims to who you
are
to gain status in consequence you are
you are perverting your soul what's the
soul the soul is something like the
structure through which the world re
reveals itself to you it's something
like that so you don't see much of the
world right you see it through narrow
apertures you see what you allow in
that's another way of thinking about it
you better make sure it's the bright
part of the world re revealing itself to
you and that isn't going to be the case
if you
lie one of the problems I think that a
lot of the people listening to this
podcast and certainly a lot of my
friends who are smart and cerebral
encounter they think themselves into
problems and they struggle to use their
intuition because they are able to come
up with a reason about why they should
or should not at any moment and you know
talking about the soul or the inner
voice or the conscience or you know you
might refer to it as God that's coming
through the best version of
yourself people that ruminate and
introspect are very capable of talking
themselves into or out of something that
feels like they worship the
intellect how would you advise somebody
who enjoys thinking about things deeply
to cast that off and be able to hear
themselves a little bit more clearly
there's a difference between attention
and
intellect there there's something to be
said for paying attention it's not the
same thing like the intellect let's say
the intellect produces thoughts the
attention gathers
information right so if
I'm well if I'm conducting a podcast
let's say I'm paying attention to what I
don't understand I'm not thinking it's
not the same thing I mean sometimes I
think because the person will say
something and it'll set off a train of
thoughts but often what I'm just doing
is like well do I understand what you
just said that's a matter of attention I
have to note my ignorance I'm attending
to my ignorance well this is what
Rogan's great at this you're great at
this as well if you attend to your
ignorance then you know what to do you
just ask the question it's like well I
don't understand this that's a form of
humility to attend to your ignorance
that's a good thing for those who
worship the luciferian intellect to do
is to attend to their own ignorance it's
not about what you know it's about what
you don't know you already know what you
know so why not investigate what you
don't know well how do you do that you
attend to your
ignorance what's the definition of
humility humility is attending to your
ignorance and you can do that wherever
you are is that not still uh an
intellectual exercise here are the holes
in what I know therefore I'm just going
to continue ask to ask the questions
until I fill
them well it's not something completely
divorced from
it's the difference between questioning
and
answering like I would say this is let's
say definitional the luciferian
intellect has an answer what's when you
say luciferian intellect what's that the
luciferian intellect is the intellect
that wants to place itself in the
highest position and there's lots of
people smart people tend to be
luciferian because they think that their
fundamental value is their intelligence
and they think that intelligence is the
fundamental value and then they're often
very annoyed if they're very bright and
the world doesn't lay itself out at
their feet because they think well I'm
so smart everything should just be
coming my way because they've prided
themsel on that it's like and
intellectual Pride well that might be
the cardinal sin the luciferian
intellect is the intellect that wants to
put itself in the highest position it's
challenges God that's what Satan is
that's what Lucifer is literally in the
miltonian story is Lucifer is the spirit
who attempts to usurp God that's what
the Communists did that's what the
fascists did that's what we do when we
build towers of Babel and we can easily
Elevate the intellect to the highest
possible place especially smart people
they do that all the time it's better to
attend to what you don't know this is
why Rogan's a very good example of this
because Rogan is not an
intellectual he's a Seeker those aren't
the same thing Rogan is always
like a blood hound he's on the path of
what he doesn't know and the consequence
of that is he knows a lot you know 2,000
podcast 2500 podcasts he's done like
2500 highlevel graduate seminars
something like that it's crazy and so
his questions get better and better as
he fills in the gaps is it
intellectual no no it's not it's it's
it's
there's a difference between an
intellectual Pursuit and a spiritual
Pursuit and the remediation of your own
ignorance is a spiritual Pursuit it's
predicated on humility how am I stupid
how can I fix that you know one of the
things I really taught my kids tried to
teach them was ask stupid
questions right and that means you have
to admit to your own insufficiency
that's what humility is and then you
have to publicly announce it here's how
I'm stupid can you fix me and you know
sometimes that is embarrassing although
much less frequently than people think
usually if you're in a crowd and you
have a stupid question and you've been
paying
attention 80% of the crowd has the same
question and they're relieved that you
know you an you asked it in fact they'll
think you're brave it's so interesting e
because you're afraid when you ask a
question if you're in a university
seminar you're afraid that what you're
going to do is expose your stupidity and
be what would you say shamed and what
happens is exactly the opposite is
everybody who's too cowardly to ask that
question now thinks that you're
courageous it's exactly the opposite of
what you think yeah that happens all the
time always in my graduate Seminars the
kids that
asked the most ignorant questions
assuming they were paying attention
because you can ask a stupid question
you know stupid question is you're I
don't know you're fiddling with your
phone and you and the class has just
covered something and you didn't notice
and you ask well you know clue in that
that's not a real question that's just
you're just wasting people's time but if
you're genuinely
ignorant I never had a student who asked
a genuine question that I thought was a
stupid question never and I'd never
treat a student that way it's like no no
if
you're if you it's so cool too because
sometimes the stupidest
questions cut to the heart of the chase
you know it's the kids who would ask a
really basic question
that also forced me to really understand
what I was
teaching and that's a reflection of
their humility it's that humility in the
pursuit
of humility in the pursuit of the ideal
that's not an intellectual exercise not
not not in the strict sense it's
definitely what generates knowledge
though that seems to be a good stepping
block toward earned wisdom as well
that's earned wisdom y y earned wisdom
through humility
right what have you got coming up next
what can people expect from you over the
next few months well what I'm working on
right now is I'm going to finish this
book hopefully by the end of December
it'll be published in November but I'm
going to go on tour weirdly enough about
the book probably starting in January
I'm going to do an American tour and
then I think I'm going to go to Africa
and to South America and to Southeast
Asia that's the plan and um I'm very
excited about this new book um I'm
hoping oping it'll be the best book that
I've ever
written it's it's going to be more
difficult book than the last two were
but not as difficult as maps of meaning
which my first book yeah it's it's it's
more it's heavy it's it's deeper have
you been fighting with trying to make it
accessible no not really right i' I've
been I've been I've been just trying to
lay the argument out as clearly as I can
like and I think that'll do the trick
and I I I have to go over it again and
edit it and make sure that
it's no more obscure than is absolutely
necessary no I want to lay it out so
that it's comprehensible and I've had a
lot of success with the biblical
Ventures that I've already embarked on I
did a series on Genesis in 2017 which
turned out to be quite influential and
then I just did a seminar on Exodus with
a group of thinkers and I know there's a
hunger for
analysis of deep stories
and I also have good people around me
that can help me grind my way through
the stories and understand them and so
I'm very much looking I've been having
quite a good time writing this book
actually it's very difficult to write
but it's been extremely exciting and
interesting
and I'm hoping you asked me earlier what
would I consider success with this
book I don't think that you'll be able
to read this book and understand it and
be
atheistic I think I can demolish the
atheistic argument
permanently and it's partly it's a weird
thing because it's not like all of a
sudden people are going to throw
themselves at the feet of God In Worship
it's like it requires a reconsideration
of what we mean by belief and I walk
through some of it it's like do you
believe in the good well there the
difference between believing in good and
beleving in God is it's it's a very
narrow
difference now there are important
differences but it's still a narrow
difference and the thing is if you don't
believe in the in good you're aimless
and if you're aimless you're hopeless
and if you're aimless and hopeless
you're anxious and fractionated and
people can't unite in their beliefs like
the the alternative is not good
reversing the enlightenment is no small
task well hopefully we can save the best
of the Enlightenment as well it's like
uh the uh cheston's fence of cheston's
fence like how many how many different
fences are in the field so to speak and
if we thrown this one out and we're
trying to plug it back in but which bit
of going back one of the things that's
very interesting and I think I think
people like Dawkins have started to
realize this and I know that people like
Douglas Murray and Ian hery Ali and Neil
Ferguson have recognize this is
that with the death of God many other
things die things you don't expect and
one of the things that dies when God
dies is science and no one expected that
how
so because science as a practice is a
religious practice it it's predicated on
religious axioms is it well you have to
believe that there's such a thing as
truth you have to believe that the truth
is understandable you have to believe
that understanding the truth is good you
have to believe that there is such a
thing as good right so imagine to be a
scientist you have to imagine that first
of all that the world is comprehensible
to the human intellect but more that if
you investigate the mysteries of the
material world that that will be
beneficial right those aren't scientific
claims those are metaphysical
claims and that metaphysical claim is
nested in a
story you know and the the enlightenment
types they've portrayed the Scientific
Revolution as something contrary to the
religious substr and that's not accurate
that's a French Revolution that's a
luciferian intellect history it's not
true the universities grew out of the
monasteries that's where the
universities came from and science as a
widespread Enterprise got its start in
the universities and they grew out of
the monasteries that's not
questionable like if you go to Harvard
or if you go to Oxford and Cambridge
it's just starkly evident the layout of
the UN of the college ol is a monastic
layout so the idea
that there's some fundamental
contradiction between religious belief
and the scientific
Enterprise it's it's there's nothing
about that that's true and part of the
reason that we're Lo part of the reason
that we're losing the scientific
Enterprise right now is because we've
unmowed it from its metaphysical
substrate and it can't survive if you're
going to be a scientist you have to put
the truth Above All Else scientists are
very rare
you have to believe in the truth to be a
scientist I think Dawkins believes in
the truth by the way so he's an atheist
but a
very he's much less of an atheist than
he thinks that's my
impression lying scientists are
atheistic or just malevolent Dawkins is
a truthful scientist and in so far as
he's pursuing the truth and in so far as
he believes that pursuing the truth will
set you free then he's walking down a
path that's Christian to its core now I
know he doesn't like that idea but he
also doesn't like the fact that the
scientific Enterprise seems to be
collapsing in terms of its what would
you call reliability and validity
everywhere
so I appreciate you mate I appreciate
the time that we get to spend it always
seems to be a very interesting
inflection uh again this yeah the
inflection this time is you're out on
tour eh I am what's your advice for me
how am I going to survive life on the
road make sure that when you step on the
stage that you understand how unlikely
it is that you have the privilege to do
this and make sure you remember that all
those people who came to see you they're
hoping for something from you they put
in some time and energy to come and see
you it matters what you do you go out on
that stage with gratitude right that'll
help a lot you got to remember that it
keeps you on the ground too you should
be grateful that they're not throwing
rocks at you right how ridiculous ous is
it that you get to do this how unlikely
is it right exactly so you keep that
first and foremost in your mind you
remember that you should be stunningly
grateful for the miracle that you have
the opportunity to do this because it's
ridiculously
improbable yeah yeah trying to do that
without getting overwhelmed is becoming
an increasingly difficult task yeah well
part of the way you handle that is that
you parse off the jobs that other people
can do you know when you're out on tour
the social element of that can be
overwhelming so you have to protect
yourself from that to some degree but
the other thing you do is anything
anyone else can do get someone to do es
and get someone competent and reliable
so that all you're focusing on get to
the next show on time in the right frame
of mind that's your
job other people have their jobs make
sure you're surrounded by people who do
their jobs like our tour so far they
become increasingly well-run I don't
worry about travel hotels meals
Transportation none of that I worry
about getting to the venue 1 hour ahead
of
time getting my head in the right place
which has to do with this attitude of
gratefulness that I described and then
trying to address a serious problem with
all the people who are participating in
the audience and
then if it's too much
then distribute the responsibility some
more how do you wind down after a show I
watched the Trailer Park
Boys of course you do yeah yeah well
after being that good you have to not be
so good for a while and the Trailer Park
Boys is a very good way of doing that
counteract a little bit Yeah I uh I
texted Rogan about this yesterday and I
thought that he would have you know God
knows how many shows that guy's done I
thought he would have some wisdom for me
I said every time that I do a show I um
I'm so excited after I finished that I
find it difficult to kind of wind down
and I've got four shows back toback then
we fly to Dubai then we've got all these
shows around the US and Canada and uh
I'm nervous that I'm not going to be
able to sleep and then if I don't sleep
then I'm not going to be able to perform
as well tomorrow and then it'll spiral
uh and I thought that he would just have
some wisdom and he said that's a tough
one man to be honest I've never had any
problem sleeping I well [ __ ] that I
guess you know uh but no I'm excited I'm
excited and I'll check back in with you
once uh once everything's done we're
going to record one of them properly
fully properly record it uh like a
special um so that'll be maybe we'll put
it up maybe it'll just stay for
posterity I don't know but uh we're GNA
have it so yeah I'm excited yeah well
good luck thank you man good luck should
be a blast yeah yeah yeah I'm definitely
going to learn a lot and as we've said
today pushing through discomfort and
doing different things uh and following
something close to Instinct a lot of the
things that I'm saying are uh like
vulnerable in some regards I guess you
know they things that are meaningful to
me uh and yeah I hope that people take
take a lot away from it and I hope they
have done from today too so one of the
things I do when I go on stage is like I
spend the first 10 or 15 seconds looking
at the audience like I don't mean I
would I've seen you do this a lot I
would I would technically refer to it as
stalking um but it's not far from a
stalk it's it's good I I look everywhere
and this is a exposure technique you
don't want to be afraid of the audience
and so at all and you don't want to be
talking to the audience
so I look at people and I see you know I
I look everywhere and as you know you
can't see in the back rows if it's a big
place but fundamentally I look
everywhere I can and I look at
individuals and I'm marking them out as
people and then I'm remembering you know
I'm talking to all these individual
people who've come here and then that's
easy because you can talk to individuals
and they're your guests say that's
another that's another thing for your
staff to know too it's like everyone who
comes to one of your events has to be
treated in the most positive possible
way cuz they're looking to you for
something you know and it's very hard on
them if they're treated inhospitably and
so you know one of the things we've
tried to do I travel with a fair number
of people now but everyone knows that
like rule number one is treat the
audience members even the ones that are
have some trouble and maybe even are
Troublesome it's like treat them like
their guests because they're guests and
you're bloody lucky that they're here so
don't get all high and mighty about it
CU they put in their time and effort to
come here and they're looking for
something so that's part of that
gratitude that that and then it's fun
right that keeps it fun it's like you're
so privileged to be there talking to
them that's you got to have that in mind
what a privilege it is that what is
these people they're coming to listen to
what you're doing that's a good deal man
that's as good as it gets so you want to
have that firmly in the back of your
mind and the front too yeah I'll try my
best Jordan Peterson ladies and
gentlemen Jordan thank you so much for
today I'm looking forward to the next
time we get to catch up good to talk to
you Chris thank you very much for tuning
in if you enjoyed that episode with
Jordan you will love my conversation
with Douglas Murray which is available
right here go on tap it